@c Copyright (C) 1992-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This file is part of the documentation for the GAS manual

@c Configuration settings for all-inclusive version of manual

@c switches:------------------------------------------------------------
@c Properties of the manual
@c ========================
@c Discuss all architectures?
@set ALL-ARCH
@c A generic form of manual (not tailored to specific target)?
@set GENERIC
@c Include text on assembler internals?
@clear INTERNALS
@c Many object formats supported in this config?
@set MULTI-OBJ

@c Object formats of interest
@c ==========================
@set AOUT
@set COFF
@set ELF
@set SOM

@c CPUs of interest
@c ================
@set AARCH64
@set ALPHA
@set ARC
@set ARM
@set AVR
@set Blackfin
@set BPF
@set CR16
@set CRIS
@set CSKY
@set D10V
@set D30V
@set EPIPHANY
@set H8/300
@set HPPA
@set I370
@set I80386
@set IA64
@set IP2K
@set LM32
@set M32C
@set M32R
@set M68HC11
@set S12Z
@set M680X0
@set MCORE
@set METAG
@set MICROBLAZE
@set MIPS
@set MMIX
@set MS1
@set MSP430
@set NIOSII
@set NDS32
@set NS32K
@set OPENRISC
@set PDP11
@set PJ
@set PPC
@set PRU
@set RL78
@set RISCV
@set RX
@set S390
@set SCORE
@set SH
@set SPARC
@set TIC54X
@set TIC6X
@set TILEGX
@set TILEPRO
@set V850
@set VAX
@set VISIUM
@set WASM32
@set XGATE
@set XSTORMY16
@set XTENSA
@set Z80
@set Z8000

@c Does this version of the assembler use the difference-table kludge?
@set DIFF-TBL-KLUGE

@c Do all machines described use IEEE floating point?
@clear IEEEFLOAT

@c Is a word 32 bits, or 16?
@clear W32
@set W16

@c Do symbols have different characters than usual?
@clear SPECIAL-SYMS

@c strings:------------------------------------------------------------
@c Name of the assembler:
@set AS as
@c Name of C compiler:
@set GCC gcc
@c Name of linker:
@set LD ld
@c Text for target machine (best not used in generic case; but just in case...)
@set TARGET machine specific
@c Name of object format NOT SET in generic version
@clear OBJ-NAME
