@c Copyright (C) 2012-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GAS manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file as.texinfo.
@c man end
@ifset GENERIC
@page
@node C-SKY-Dependent
@chapter C-SKY Dependent Features
@end ifset
@ifclear GENERIC
@node Machine Dependencies
@chapter C-SKY Dependent Features
@end ifclear

@cindex C-SKY support
@menu
* C-SKY Options::              Options
* C-SKY Syntax::               Syntax
@end menu

@node C-SKY Options
@section Options
@cindex C-SKY options
@cindex options for C-SKY

@c man begin OPTIONS
@table @gcctabopt

@cindex @code{march} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -march=@var{archname}
Assemble for architecture @var{archname}.  The @option{--help} option
lists valid values for @var{archname}.

@cindex @code{mcpu} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mcpu=@var{cpuname}
Assemble for architecture @var{cpuname}.  The @option{--help} option
lists valid values for @var{cpuname}.

@cindex @code{EL} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mlittle-endian} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -EL
@itemx -mlittle-endian
Generate little-endian output.

@cindex @code{EB} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mbig-endian} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -EB
@itemx -mbig-endian
Generate big-endian output.

@cindex @code{fpic} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{pic} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -fpic
@itemx -pic
Generate position-independent code.

@cindex @code{mljump} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mno-ljump} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mljump
@itemx -mno-ljump
Enable/disable transformation of the short branch instructions
@code{jbf}, @code{jbt}, and @code{jbr} to @code{jmpi}.
This option is for V2 processors only.
It is ignored on CK801 and CK802 targets, which do not support the @code{jmpi}
instruction, and is enabled by default for other processors.

@cindex @code{mbranch-stub} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mno-branch-stub} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mbranch-stub
@itemx -mno-branch-stub
Pass through @code{R_CKCORE_PCREL_IMM26BY2} relocations for @code{bsr}
instructions to the linker.

This option is only available for bare-metal C-SKY V2 ELF targets,
where it is enabled by default.  It cannot be used in code that will be
dynamically linked against shared libraries.

@cindex @code{force2bsr} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mforce2bsr} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{no-force2bsr} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mno-force2bsr} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -force2bsr
@itemx -mforce2bsr
@itemx -no-force2bsr
@itemx -mno-force2bsr
Enable/disable transformation of @code{jbsr} instructions to @code{bsr}.
This option is always enabled (and @option{-mno-force2bsr} is ignored)
for CK801/CK802 targets.  It is also always enabled when
@option{-mbranch-stub} is in effect.

@cindex @code{jsri2bsr} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mjsri2bsr} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{no-jsri2bsr} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mno-jsri2bsr} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -jsri2bsr
@itemx -mjsri2bsr
@itemx -no-jsri2bsr
@itemx -mno-jsri2bsr
Enable/disable transformation of @code{jsri} instructions to @code{bsr}.
This option is enabled by default.

@cindex @code{mnolrw} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mno-lrw} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mnolrw
@itemx -mno-lrw
Enable/disable transformation of @code{lrw} instructions into a
@code{movih}/@code{ori} pair.

@cindex @code{melrw} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mno-elrw} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -melrw
@itemx -mno-elrw
Enable/disable extended @code{lrw} instructions.
This option is enabled by default for CK800-series processors.

@cindex @code{mlaf} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mliterals-after-func} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mno-laf} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mno-literals-after-func} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mlaf
@itemx -mliterals-after-func
@itemx -mno-laf
@itemx -mno-literals-after-func
Enable/disable placement of literal pools after each function.

@cindex @code{mlabr} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mliterals-after-br} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mno-labr} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mnoliterals-after-br} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mlabr
@itemx -mliterals-after-br
@itemx -mno-labr
@itemx -mnoliterals-after-br
Enable/disable placement of literal pools after unconditional branches.
This option is enabled by default.

@cindex @code{mistack} command-line option, C-SKY
@cindex @code{mno-istack} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mistack
@itemx -mno-istack
Enable/disable interrupt stack instructions.  This option is enabled by
default on CK801, CK802, and CK802 processors.

@end table

The following options explicitly enable certain optional instructions.
These features are also enabled implicitly by using @code{-mcpu=} to specify
a processor that supports it.

@table @gcctabopt
@cindex @code{mhard-float} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mhard-float
Enable hard float instructions.

@cindex @code{mmp} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mmp
Enable multiprocessor instructions.

@cindex @code{mcp} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mcp
Enable coprocessor instructions.

@cindex @code{mcache} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mcache
Enable cache prefetch instruction.

@cindex @code{msecurity} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -msecurity
Enable C-SKY security instructions.

@cindex @code{mtrust} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mtrust
Enable C-SKY trust instructions.

@cindex @code{mdsp} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mdsp
Enable DSP instructions.

@cindex @code{medsp} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -medsp
Enable enhanced DSP instructions.

@cindex @code{mvdsp} command-line option, C-SKY
@item -mvdsp
Enable vector DSP instructions.

@end table
@c man end

@node C-SKY Syntax
@section Syntax

@code{@value{AS}} implements the standard C-SKY assembler syntax
documented in the
@cite{C-SKY V2 CPU Applications Binary Interface Standards Manual}.
