@c Copyright (C) 1999-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GAS manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file as.texinfo.
@c man end

@ifset GENERIC
@page
@node Epiphany-Dependent
@chapter Epiphany Dependent Features
@end ifset
@ifclear GENERIC
@node Machine Dependencies
@chapter Epiphany Dependent Features
@end ifclear

@cindex Epiphany support
@menu
* Epiphany Options::              Options
* Epiphany Syntax::               Epiphany Syntax
@end menu

@node Epiphany Options
@section Options

@cindex Epiphany options
@cindex options, Epiphany
@code{@value{AS}} has two additional command-line options for the Epiphany
architecture.

@c man begin OPTIONS
@table @gcctabopt

@cindex @code{-mepiphany} command-line option, Epiphany
@item -mepiphany
Specifies that the both 32 and 16 bit instructions are allowed.  This is the
default behavior.

@cindex @code{-mepiphany16} command-line option, Epiphany
@item -mepiphany16
Restricts the permitted instructions to just the 16 bit set.
@end table
@c man end

@node Epiphany Syntax
@section Epiphany Syntax
@menu
* Epiphany-Chars::                Special Characters
@end menu

@node Epiphany-Chars
@subsection Special Characters

@cindex line comment character, Epiphany
@cindex Epiphany line comment character
The presence of a @samp{;} on a line indicates the start
of a comment that extends to the end of the current line.

If a @samp{#} appears as the first character of a line then the whole
line is treated as a comment, but in this case the line could also be
a logical line number directive (@pxref{Comments}) or a preprocessor
control command (@pxref{Preprocessing}).

@cindex line separator, Epiphany
@cindex statement separator, Epiphany
@cindex Epiphany line separator
The @samp{`} character can be used to separate statements on the same
line.
