@c Copyright (C) 2013-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Contributed by Imagination Technologies Ltd.
@c This is part of the GAS manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file as.texinfo.
@c man end

@ifset GENERIC
@page
@node Meta-Dependent
@chapter Meta Dependent Features
@end ifset
@ifclear GENERIC
@node Machine Dependencies
@chapter Meta Dependent Features
@end ifclear

@cindex Meta support
@menu
* Meta Options::                Options
* Meta Syntax::                 Meta Assembler Syntax
@end menu

@node Meta Options
@section Options

@cindex options for Meta
@cindex Meta options
@cindex architectures, Meta
@cindex Meta architectures

The Imagination Technologies Meta architecture is implemented in a
number of versions, with each new version adding new features such as
instructions and registers. For precise details of what instructions
each core supports, please see the chip's technical reference manual.

The following table lists all available Meta options.

@c man begin OPTIONS
@table @code
@item -mcpu=metac11
Generate code for Meta 1.1.

@item -mcpu=metac12
Generate code for Meta 1.2.

@item -mcpu=metac21
Generate code for Meta 2.1.

@item -mfpu=metac21
Allow code to use FPU hardware of Meta 2.1.

@end table
@c man end

@node Meta Syntax
@section Syntax

@menu
* Meta-Chars::                Special Characters
* Meta-Regs::                 Register Names
@end menu

@node Meta-Chars
@subsection Special Characters

@cindex line comment character, Meta
@cindex Meta line comment character
@samp{!} is the line comment character.

@cindex line separator, Meta
@cindex statement separator, Meta
@cindex Meta line separator
You can use @samp{;} instead of a newline to separate statements.

@cindex symbol names, @samp{$} in
@cindex @code{$} in symbol names
Since @samp{$} has no special meaning, you may use it in symbol names.

@node Meta-Regs
@subsection Register Names

@cindex Meta registers
@cindex registers, Meta
Registers can be specified either using their mnemonic names, such as
@samp{D0Re0}, or using the unit plus register number separated by a @samp{.},
such as @samp{D0.0}.
