Changes in TIFF v3.5.4
======================

.. table:: References
  :widths: auto

  ======================  ==========================================
  Current Version         v3.5.4 (:tag:`Release-v3-5-4`)
  Previous Version        :doc:`v3.5.3 <v3.5.3>`
  Master Download Site    `<ftp://ftp.onshore.com/pub/libtiff/>`_
  Master HTTP Site        `<http://www.simplesystems.org/libtiff/>`_
  ======================  ==========================================

This document describes the changes made to the software between the
*previous* and *current* versions (see above).
If you don't find something listed here, then it was not done in this
timeframe, or it was not considered important enough to be mentioned.
The following information is located here:


Software configuration changes
------------------------------

* None.


Library changes
---------------

* Added Pixar tag support.  Contributed by `Phil Beffery <phil@pixar.com>`_.
* Made one more change to :file:`tif_dir.c` for removal of LZW compression. Also added notice
  when LZW compression invoked. 
* Fixed bug that caused LZW (non) compression to segfault. Added 
  warning about LZW compression removed being removed, and why. 


Tools changes
-------------

* Changed default compression in tools to :c:macro:`TIFF_PACKBITS`, and changed usage descriptions
  in tools to reflect removal of LZW compression
* Added ``nostrip`` to install in :file:`tools/Makefile.in` so that debugging
  symbols are kept. 
* Made Packbits the default compression in :file:`tools/tiff2rgba.c` instead
  of LZW.
