Changes in TIFF v3.7.0
======================

.. table:: References
  :widths: auto

  ======================  ==========================================
  Current Version         v3.7.0 (:tag:`Release-v3-7-0`)
  Previous Version        :doc:`v3.7.0beta2 <v3.7.0beta2>`
  Master Download Site    `<https://download.osgeo.org/libtiff/>`_
  Master HTTP Site        `<http://www.simplesystems.org/libtiff/>`_
  ======================  ==========================================

This document describes the changes made to the software between the
*previous* and *current* versions (see above).
If you don't find something listed here, then it was not done in this
timeframe, or it was not considered important enough to be mentioned.
The following information is located here:


Major changes
-------------


* Several bugs found after 3.7.0beta2 release were fixed.


Software configuration changes
------------------------------

* :file:`ltmain.sh`: Fix for MinGW compilation.


Library changes
---------------

* :file:`libtiff/tif_dirread.c`, :file:`libtiff/tif_jpeg.c`, :file:`libtiff/tif_luv.c`,
  :file:`libtiff/tif_ojpeg.c`, :file:`libtiff/tif_pixarlog.c`, :file:`libtiff/tif_write.c`:
  Handle the zero strip/tile sizes properly (Dmitry V. Levin, Marcus Meissner).

* :file:`libtiff/tif_dirinfo.c`: Type of the :c:macro:`TIFFTAG_SUBIFD` field changed
  to :c:enumerator:`TIFF_IFD`.
  
* Preliminary support for BigTIFF files: now libtiff can
  recognize and reject to open such images. ;-)

* :file:`libtiff/tif_dir.c`: Initialize :c:member:`td_tilewidth` and :c:member:`td_tilelength` fields
  of the :c:struct:`TIFFDirectory` structure with the 0 instead of -1 to avoid
  confusing integer overflows in :c:func:`TIFFTileRowSize` for striped images.

* :file:`libtiff/tif_dirinfo.c`: Fix bug with ``tif_foundfield`` and reallocation
  of ``tif_fieldinfo`` as per bug
  :bugzilla-rs:`630`

* :file:`libtiff/tif_compress.c`: Improved error reporting in
  :c:func:`TIFFGetConfiguredCODECs` (Dmitry V. Levin).


Tools changes
-------------

* :file:`tiffcmp.c` (:c:func:`leof`): Renamed from "``eof``" in order to avoid
  conflict noticed under MinGW.

* :file:`tiff2pdf.c`: Fixed ``TransferFunction`` tag handling reported
  by Ross A. Finlayson.


Contributed software changes
----------------------------

* None.


LZW compression kit changes
---------------------------

* This one is not longer needed.
