Changes in TIFF v3.9.2
======================

.. table:: References
  :widths: auto

  ======================  ==========================================
  Current Version         v3.9.2 (:tag:`Release-v3-9-2`)
  Previous Version        :doc:`v3.9.1 <v3.9.1>`
  Master Download Site    `<https://download.osgeo.org/libtiff/>`_
  Master HTTP Site        `<http://www.simplesystems.org/libtiff/>`_
  ======================  ==========================================


This document describes the changes made to the software between the
*previous* and *current* versions (see above).  If you don't
find something listed here, then it was not done in this timeframe, or
it was not considered important enough to be mentioned.  The following
information is located here:


Major changes
-------------

* Fixes a number of bugs present in the 3.9.1 release.

* OJPEG support updated to work with IJG JPEG 7 release.

* :program:`tiffcrop` validated for most TIFF storage subformats and sample depths.


Software configuration changes
------------------------------

* x86_64 now uses the same default fill order as i386.


Library changes
---------------

* Writing tags with an array value of type :c:enumerator:`TIFF_DOUBLE` now
  returns correct error status. The :c:macro:`TIFFTAG_SMINSAMPLEVALUE` and
  :c:macro:`TIFFTAG_SMAXSAMPLEVALUE` tags failed to write without this fix.

* OJPEG decoder now works with IJG JPEG 7.  Resolves "Bug
  2090 - OJPEG crash with libjpeg v7".
  :bugzilla:`2090`

* Eliminate most GCC "dereferencing type-punned pointer"
  warnings.


Tools changes
-------------

* New :program:`tiffcrop` from Richard Nolde.  Major updates to add
  significant functionality for reading and writing tile based
  images with bit depths not a multiple of 8 which cannot be
  handled by :program:`tiffcp`.

* Allow building tools with GCC using the ``-Wformat
  -Werror=format-security`` flags.

Contributed software changes
----------------------------

* None
