Changes in TIFF v3.9.1
======================

.. table:: References
  :widths: auto

  ======================  ==========================================
  Current Version         v3.9.1 (:tag:`Release-v3-9-1`)
  Previous Version        :doc:`v3.9.0 <v3.9.0>`
  Master Download Site    `<https://download.osgeo.org/libtiff/>`_
  Master HTTP Site        `<http://www.simplesystems.org/libtiff/>`_
  ======================  ==========================================


This document describes the changes made to the software between the
*previous* and *current* versions (see above).  If you don't
find something listed here, then it was not done in this timeframe, or
it was not considered important enough to be mentioned.  The following
information is located here:


Major changes
-------------

* This is a bug-fix release for several bugs (two of which
  are dire) which were discovered in the 3.9.0 release.


Software configuration changes
------------------------------

* Several defines were missing from :file:`tif_config.vc.h` which
  are necessary to compile the library using MSVC.

* Colorized tests were actually not enabled as expected.
  Parallel tests mode is now also enabled so that tests can be
  run in parallel, and test output is sent to :file:`.log` files.


Library changes
---------------

* :file:`libtiff/tif_write.c` (:c:func:`TIFFAppendToStrip`): Remove cast
  which caused libtiff to output a wrong last strip with
  byte-count and strip-offset of zero.  This cast was added on
  the day of the 3.9.0 release.

* :file:`libtiff/tif_dirwrite.c`: Back out changes from 2007-11-22
  that resulted in the final strip not being written in some
  circumstances.
  :bugzilla:`2088`


Tools changes
-------------

None


Contributed software changes
----------------------------

* None
