=head1 NAME

Test HTML Rendering

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    use My::Module;

    my $module = My::Module->new();

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is the description.

    Here is a verbatim section.

This is some more regular text.

Here is some B<bold> text, some I<italic> and something that looks 
like an E<lt>htmlE<gt> tag. This is some C<$code($arg1)>.

This C<text contains embedded B<bold> and I<italic> tags>. These can 
be nested, allowing B<bold and I<bold E<amp> italic> text>. The module also
supports the extended B<< syntax >> and permits I<< nested tags E<amp>
other B<<< cool >>> stuff >>

=head1 METHODS =E<gt> OTHER STUFF

Here is a list of methods

=head2 new()

Constructor method. Accepts the following config options:

=over 4

=item foo

The foo item.

=item bar

The bar item.

=over 4

This is a list within a list 

=item *

The wiz item.

=item *

The waz item.

=back

=item baz

The baz item.

=over 4

=item * 

A correct list within a list

=item * Boomerang

=back

=back

Title on the same line as the =item + * bullets

=over

=item * C<Black> Cat

=item * Sat S<I<on> the>

=item * MatE<lt>!E<gt>

=back

Title on the same line as the =item + numerical bullets

=over

=item 1

Cat

=item 2

Sat

=item 3

Mat

=back

Numbered list with text on the same line

=over

=item 1 Cat

=item 2 Sat

=item 3 Mat

=back

No bullets, no title

=over

=item

Cat

=item

Sat

=item

Mat

=back

=head2 old()

Destructor method

=head1 TESTING FOR AND BEGIN

=for html    <br />
<p>
blah blah
</p>

intermediate text

=begin html

<more>
HTML
</more>

some text

=end html

=head1 TESTING URLs hyperlinking

This is an href link1: http://example.com

This is an href link2: http://example.com/foo/bar.html

This is an email link: mailto:foo@bar.com

    This is a link in a verbatim block <a href="http://perl.org"> Perl </a>

=head1 SEE ALSO

See also L<Test Page 2|htmlescp>, the L<Your::Module> and L<Their::Module>
manpages and the other interesting file F</usr/local/my/module/rocks>
as well.

=cut
