=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5341delta - what is new for perl v5.34.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.34.0 release and the 5.34.1
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.33.0, first read
L<perl5340delta>, which describes differences between 5.33.0 and 5.34.0.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.34.0.  If any exist,
they are bugs, and we request that you submit a report.  See
L</Reporting Bugs> below.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<B::Deparse> has been upgraded from version 1.56 to 1.57.

=item *

L<Encode> has been upgraded from version 3.08 to 3.08_01.

=item *

L<GDBM_File> has been upgraded from version 1.19 to 1.19_01.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20210520 to 5.20220313.

=item *

L<perl5db.pl> has been upgraded from version 1.60 to 1.60_01.

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes in this
release.

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Windows

=over 4

=item *

Support for compiling perl on Windows using Microsoft Visual Studio 2022
(containing Visual C++ 14.3) has been added.

=back

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

B::Deparse now correctly handles try/catch blocks with more complex scopes.
[L<GH #18874|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18874>]

=item * 

try/catch now correctly returns the last evaluated expression when the catch
block has more than one statement. [L<GH #18855|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18855>]

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.34.1 represents approximately 10 months of development since Perl 5.34.0
and contains approximately 4,600 lines of changes across 60 files from 23
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 1,100 lines of changes to 18 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.34.1:

Andrew Fresh, Atsushi Sugawara, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Dan Book, Hugo van der
Sanden, James E Keenan, Karen Etheridge, Leon Timmermans, Matthew Horsfall, Max
Maischein, Michiel Beijen, Neil Bowers, Nicolas R., Paul Evans, Renee Baecker,
Ricardo Signes, Richard Leach, Sawyer X, Sergey Poznyakoff, Steve Hay, Tomasz
Konojacki, Tony Cook, Yves Orton.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
