=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5163delta - what is new for perl v5.16.3

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.16.2 release and
the 5.16.3 release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.16.1, first read
L<perl5162delta>, which describes differences between 5.16.1 and
5.16.2.

=head1 Core Enhancements

No changes since 5.16.0.

=head1 Security

This release contains one major and a number of minor security fixes.
These latter are included mainly to allow the test suite to pass cleanly
with the clang compiler's address sanitizer facility.

=head2 CVE-2013-1667: memory exhaustion with arbitrary hash keys

With a carefully crafted set of hash keys (for example arguments on a
URL), it is possible to cause a hash to consume a large amount of memory
and CPU, and thus possibly to achieve a Denial-of-Service.

This problem has been fixed.

=head2 wrap-around with IO on long strings

Reading or writing strings greater than 2**31 bytes in size could segfault
due to integer wraparound.

This problem has been fixed.

=head2 memory leak in Encode

The UTF-8 encoding implementation in Encode.xs had a memory leak which has been
fixed.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.16.0. If any
exist, they are bugs and reports are welcome.

=head1 Deprecations

There have been no deprecations since 5.16.0.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<Encode> has been upgraded from version 2.44 to version 2.44_01.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 2.76 to version 2.76_02.

=item *

L<XS::APItest> has been upgraded from version 0.38 to version 0.39.

=back

=head1 Known Problems

None.

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.16.3 represents approximately 4 months of development since Perl 5.16.2
and contains approximately 870 lines of changes across 39 files from 7 authors.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.16.3:

Andy Dougherty, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Dave Rolsky, David Mitchell, Michael
Schroeder, Ricardo Signes, Yves Orton.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles
recently posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl
bug database at http://rt.perl.org/perlbug/ .  There may also be
information at http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug>
program included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down
to a tiny but sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the
output of C<perl -V>, will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be
analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please
send it to perl5-security-report@perl.org. This points to a closed
subscription unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core
committers, who will be able to help assess the impact of issues, figure
out a resolution, and help co-ordinate the release of patches to
mitigate or fix the problem across all platforms on which Perl is
supported. Please only use this address for security issues in the Perl
core, not for modules independently distributed on CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details
on what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
