=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5144delta - what is new for perl v5.14.4

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.14.3 release and
the 5.14.4 release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.12.0, first read
L<perl5140delta>, which describes differences between 5.12.0 and
5.14.0.

=head1 Core Enhancements

No changes since 5.14.0.

=head1 Security

This release contains one major, and medium, and a number of minor
security fixes.  The latter are included mainly to allow the test suite to
pass cleanly with the clang compiler's address sanitizer facility.

=head2 CVE-2013-1667: memory exhaustion with arbitrary hash keys

With a carefully crafted set of hash keys (for example arguments on a
URL), it is possible to cause a hash to consume a large amount of memory
and CPU, and thus possibly to achieve a Denial-of-Service.

This problem has been fixed.

=head2 memory leak in Encode

The UTF-8 encoding implementation in Encode.xs had a memory leak which has been
fixed.

=head2 [perl #111594] Socket::unpack_sockaddr_un heap-buffer-overflow

A read buffer overflow could occur when copying C<sockaddr> buffers.
Fairly harmless.

This problem has been fixed.

=head2 [perl #111586] SDBM_File: fix off-by-one access to global ".dir"

An extra byte was being copied for some string literals. Fairly harmless.

This problem has been fixed.

=head2 off-by-two error in List::Util

A string literal was being used that included two bytes beyond the
end of the string. Fairly harmless.

This problem has been fixed.

=head2 [perl #115994] fix segv in regcomp.c:S_join_exact()

Under debugging builds, while marking optimised-out regex nodes as type
C<OPTIMIZED>, it could treat blocks of exact text as if they were nodes,
and thus SEGV. Fairly harmless.

This problem has been fixed.

=head2 [perl #115992] PL_eval_start use-after-free

The statement C<local $[;>, when preceded by an C<eval>, and when not part
of an assignment, could crash. Fairly harmless.

This problem has been fixed.

=head2 wrap-around with IO on long strings

Reading or writing strings greater than 2**31 bytes in size could segfault
due to integer wraparound.

This problem has been fixed.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.14.0. If any
exist, they are bugs and reports are welcome.

=head1 Deprecations

There have been no deprecations since 5.14.0.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 New Modules and Pragmata

None

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

The following modules have just the minor code fixes as listed above in
L</Security> (version numbers have not changed):

=over 4

=item Socket

=item SDBM_File

=item List::Util

=back

L<Encode> has been upgraded from version 2.42_01 to version 2.42_02.

L<Module::CoreList> has been updated to version 2.49_06 to add data for
this release.

=head2 Removed Modules and Pragmata

None.

=head1 Documentation

=head2 New Documentation

None.

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

None.

=head1 Diagnostics

No new or changed diagnostics.

=head1 Utility Changes

None

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

No changes.

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 New Platforms

None.

=head2 Discontinued Platforms

None.

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item VMS

5.14.3 failed to compile on VMS due to incomplete application of a patch
series that allowed C<userelocatableinc> and C<usesitecustomize> to be
used simultaneously.  Other platforms were not affected and the problem
has now been corrected.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

In Perl 5.14.0, C<$tainted ~~ @array> stopped working properly.  Sometimes
it would erroneously fail (when C<$tainted> contained a string that occurs
in the array I<after> the first element) or erroneously succeed (when
C<undef> occurred after the first element) [perl #93590].

=back

=head1 Known Problems

None.

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.14.4 represents approximately 5 months of development since Perl 5.14.3
and contains approximately 1,700 lines of changes across 49 files from 12
authors.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.14.4:

Andy Dougherty, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Christian Hansen, Craig A. Berry,
Dave Rolsky, David Mitchell, Dominic Hargreaves, Father Chrysostomos,
Florian Ragwitz, Reini Urban, Ricardo Signes, Yves Orton.


The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.


=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles
recently posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl
bug database at http://rt.perl.org/perlbug/ .  There may also be
information at http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug>
program included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down
to a tiny but sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the
output of C<perl -V>, will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be
analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send
it to perl5-security-report@perl.org. This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core committers, who be able
to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported. Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently
distributed on CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details
on what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
