=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5301delta - what is new for perl v5.30.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.30.0 release and the 5.30.1
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.28.0, first read
L<perl5300delta>, which describes differences between 5.28.0 and 5.30.0.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.30.1.  If any exist,
they are bugs, and we request that you submit a report.  See
L</Reporting Bugs> below.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20190522 to 5.20191110.

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes listed in
this document.  If you find any we have missed, send email to
L<perlbug@perl.org|mailto:perlbug@perl.org>.

Additionally, documentation has been updated to reference GitHub as the new
canonical repository and to describe the new GitHub pull request workflow.

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

The C<ECHO> macro is now defined.  This is used in a C<dtrace> rule that was
originally changed for FreeBSD, and the FreeBSD make apparently predefines it.
The Solaris make does not predefine C<ECHO> which broke this rule on Solaris.
L<[perl #17057]|https://github.com/perl/perl5/issues/17057>

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes in this
release.

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Win32

The locale tests could crash on Win32 due to a Windows bug, and separately due
to the CRT throwing an exception if the locale name wasn't validly encoded in
the current code page.

For the second we now decode the locale name ourselves, and always decode it as
UTF-8.

L<[perl #16922]|https://github.com/perl/perl5/issues/16922>

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Setting C<$)> now properly sets supplementary group ids, if you have the
necessary privileges.
L<[perl #17031]|https://github.com/perl/perl5/issues/17031>

=item *

C<readline @foo> now evaluates C<@foo> in scalar context.  Previously, it would
be evaluated in list context, and since readline() pops only one argument from
the stack, the stack could underflow, or be left with unexpected values on it.
L<[perl #16929]|https://github.com/perl/perl5/issues/16929>

=item *

sv_gets() now recovers better if the target SV is modified by a signal handler.
L<[perl #16960]|https://github.com/perl/perl5/issues/16960>

=item *

Matching a non-C<SVf_UTF8> string against a regular expression containing
Unicode literals could leak an SV on each match attempt.
L<[perl #17140]|https://github.com/perl/perl5/issues/17140>

=item *

C<< sprintf("%.*a", -10000, $x) >> would cause a buffer overflow due to
mishandling of the negative precision value.
L<[perl #16942]|https://github.com/perl/perl5/issues/16942>

=item *

C<scalar()> on a reference could cause an erroneous assertion failure during
compilation.
L<[perl #16969]|https://github.com/perl/perl5/issues/16969>

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.30.1 represents approximately 6 months of development since Perl 5.30.0
and contains approximately 4,700 lines of changes across 67 files from 14
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 910 lines of changes to 20 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers.  The following people are known to have contributed
the improvements that became Perl 5.30.1:

Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Dan Book, David Mitchell, Hugo van der Sanden, James E
Keenan, Karen Etheridge, Karl Williamson, Manuel Mausz, Max Maischein, Nicolas
R., Sawyer X, Steve Hay, Tom Hukins, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history.  In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core.  We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database at
L<https://rt.perl.org/>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION> for details of how to
report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5, you
can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
