=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5361delta - what is new for perl v5.36.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.36.0 release and the 5.36.1
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.35.0, first read
L<perl5360delta>, which describes differences between 5.35.0 and 5.36.0.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.36.0.  If any exist,
they are bugs, and we request that you submit a report.  See
L</Reporting Bugs> below.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20220520 to 5.20230423.

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

C<Configure> probed for the return type of malloc() and free() by testing
whether declarations for those functions produced a function type mismatch with
the implementation.  On Solaris, with a C++ compiler, this check always failed,
since Solaris instead imports malloc() and free() from C<std::> with C<using>
for C++ builds.  Since the return types of malloc() and free() are well defined
by the C standard, skip probing for them.  C<Configure> command-line arguments
and hints can still override these type in the unlikely case that is needed.
[L<GH #20806|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/20806>]

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes in this
release.

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

An eval() as the last statement in a regex code block could trigger an
interpreter panic; e.g.

    /(?{ ...; eval {....}; })/

[L<GH #19680|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19680>]

=item *

An C<eval EXPR> referring to a lexical sub defined in grandparent scope no
longer produces an assertion failures.
[L<GH #19857|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19857>]

=item *

Writing to a magic variables associated with the selected output handle, C<$^>,
C<$~>, C<$=>, C<$-> and C<$%>, no longer crashes perl if the IO object has been
cleared from the selected output handle.
[L<GH #20733|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/20733>]

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.36.1 represents approximately 11 months of development since Perl 5.36.0
and contains approximately 5,500 lines of changes across 62 files from 24
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 1,600 lines of changes to 23 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers.  The following people are known to have contributed
the improvements that became Perl 5.36.1:

Andreas König, Bram, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Craig A. Berry, Dagfinn Ilmari
Mannsåker, David Mitchell, Elvin Aslanov, Florian Weimer, Graham Knop, Hugo
van der Sanden, Karen Etheridge, Karl Williamson, Leon Timmermans, Matthew
Horsfall, Max Maischein, Neil Bowers, Nicolas R, Renee Baecker, Ricardo Signes,
Richard Leach, Steve Hay, Todd Rinaldo, Tony Cook, Yves Orton.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history.  In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core.  We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION> for details of how to
report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5, you
can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
