=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5302delta - what is new for perl v5.30.2

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.30.1 release and the 5.30.2
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.30.0, first read
L<perl5301delta>, which describes differences between 5.30.0 and 5.30.1.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.30.0.  If any exist,
they are bugs, and we request that you submit a report.  See L</Reporting Bugs>
below.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Bzip2> has been upgraded from version 2.084 to 2.089.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20191110 to 5.20200314.

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes
listed in this document.  If you find any we have missed, send email
to L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

GCC 10 is now supported by F<Configure>.

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes in this
release.

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Windows

The MYMALLOC (PERL_MALLOC) build on Windows has been fixed.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

printf() or sprintf() with the C<%n> format no longer cause a panic on
debugging builds, or report an incorrectly cached length value when producing
C<SVfUTF8> flagged strings.

[L<GH #17221|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/17221>]

=item *

A memory leak in regular expression patterns has been fixed.

[L<GH #17218|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/17218>]

=item *

A read beyond buffer in grok_infnan has been fixed.

[L<GH #17370|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/17370>]

=item *

An assertion failure in the regular expression engine has been fixed.

[L<GH #17372|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/17372>]

=item *

C<(?{...})> eval groups in regular expressions no longer unintentionally
trigger "EVAL without pos change exceeded limit in regex".

[L<GH #17490|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/17490>]

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.30.2 represents approximately 4 months of development since Perl 5.30.1
and contains approximately 2,100 lines of changes across 110 files from 15
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 920 lines of changes to 30 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers.  The following people are known to have contributed
the improvements that became Perl 5.30.2:

Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Dan Book, David Mitchell, Hugo van der Sanden, Karen
Etheridge, Karl Williamson, Matthew Horsfall, Nicolas R., Petr Písař, Renee
Baecker, Sawyer X, Steve Hay, Tomasz Konojacki, Tony Cook, Yves Orton.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history.  In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core.  We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database at
L<https://rt.perl.org/>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see L<perlsec/SECURITY
VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION> for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
