=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5143delta - what is new for perl v5.14.3

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.14.2 release and
the 5.14.3 release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.12.0, first read
L<perl5140delta>, which describes differences between 5.12.0 and
5.14.0.

=head1 Core Enhancements

No changes since 5.14.0.

=head1 Security

=head2 C<Digest> unsafe use of eval (CVE-2011-3597)

The C<Digest-E<gt>new()> function did not properly sanitize input before
using it in an eval() call, which could lead to the injection of arbitrary
Perl code.

In order to exploit this flaw, the attacker would need to be able to set
the algorithm name used, or be able to execute arbitrary Perl code already.

This problem has been fixed.

=head2 Heap buffer overrun in 'x' string repeat operator (CVE-2012-5195)

Poorly written perl code that allows an attacker to specify the count to
perl's 'x' string repeat operator can already cause a memory exhaustion
denial-of-service attack. A flaw in versions of perl before 5.15.5 can
escalate that into a heap buffer overrun; coupled with versions of glibc
before 2.16, it possibly allows the execution of arbitrary code.

This problem has been fixed.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.14.0. If any
exist, they are bugs and reports are welcome.

=head1 Deprecations

There have been no deprecations since 5.14.0.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 New Modules and Pragmata

None

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<PerlIO::scalar> was updated to fix a bug in which opening a filehandle to
a glob copy caused assertion failures (under debugging) or hangs or other
erratic behaviour without debugging.

=item *

L<ODBM_File> and L<NDBM_File> were updated to allow building on GNU/Hurd.

=item *

L<IPC::Open3> has been updated to fix a regression introduced in perl
5.12, which broke C<IPC::Open3::open3($in, $out, $err, '-')>.
[perl #95748]

=item *

L<Digest> has been upgraded from version 1.16 to 1.16_01.

See L</Security>.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been updated to version 2.49_04 to add data for
this release.

=back

=head2 Removed Modules and Pragmata

None

=head1 Documentation

=head2 New Documentation

None

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

=head3 L<perlcheat>

=over 4

=item *

L<perlcheat> was updated to 5.14.

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

h2ph was updated to search correctly gcc include directories on platforms
such as Debian with multi-architecture support.

=item *

In Configure, the test for procselfexe was refactored into a loop.

=back

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 New Platforms

None

=head2 Discontinued Platforms

None

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item FreeBSD

The FreeBSD hints file was corrected to be compatible with FreeBSD 10.0.

=item Solaris and NetBSD

Configure was updated for "procselfexe" support on Solaris and NetBSD.

=item HP-UX

README.hpux was updated to note the existence of a broken header in
HP-UX 11.00.

=item Linux

libutil is no longer used when compiling on Linux platforms, which avoids
warnings being emitted.

The system gcc (rather than any other gcc which might be in the compiling
user's path) is now used when searching for libraries such as C<-lm>.

=item Mac OS X

The locale tests were updated to reflect the behaviour of locales in
Mountain Lion.

=item GNU/Hurd

Various build and test fixes were included for GNU/Hurd.

LFS support was enabled in GNU/Hurd.

=item NetBSD

The NetBSD hints file was corrected to be compatible with NetBSD 6.*

=back

=head1 Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

A regression has been fixed that was introduced in 5.14, in C</i>
regular expression matching, in which a match improperly fails if the
pattern is in UTF-8, the target string is not, and a Latin-1 character
precedes a character in the string that should match the pattern.  [perl
#101710]

=item *

In case-insensitive regular expression pattern matching, no longer on
UTF-8 encoded strings does the scan for the start of match only look at
the first possible position.  This caused matches such as
C<"f\x{FB00}" =~ /ff/i> to fail.

=item *

The sitecustomize support was made relocatableinc aware, so that
-Dusesitecustomize and -Duserelocatableinc may be used together.

=item *

The smartmatch operator (C<~~>) was changed so that the right-hand side
takes precedence during C<Any ~~ Object> operations.

=item *

A bug has been fixed in the tainting support, in which an C<index()>
operation on a tainted constant would cause all other constants to become
tainted.  [perl #64804]

=item *

A regression has been fixed that was introduced in perl 5.12, whereby
tainting errors were not correctly propagated through C<die()>.
[perl #111654]

=item *

A regression has been fixed that was introduced in perl 5.14, in which
C</[[:lower:]]/i> and C</[[:upper:]]/i> no longer matched the opposite case.
[perl #101970]

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.14.3 represents approximately 12 months of development since Perl 5.14.2
and contains approximately 2,300 lines of changes across 64 files from 22
authors.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.14.3:

Abigail, Andy Dougherty, Carl Hayter, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Dave Rolsky,
David Mitchell, Dominic Hargreaves, Father Chrysostomos, Florian Ragwitz,
H.Merijn Brand, Jilles Tjoelker, Karl Williamson, Leon Timmermans, Michael G
Schwern, Nicholas Clark, Niko Tyni, Pino Toscano, Ricardo Signes, Salvador
Fandiño, Samuel Thibault, Steve Hay, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles
recently posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl
bug database at http://rt.perl.org/perlbug/ .  There may also be
information at http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug>
program included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down
to a tiny but sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the
output of C<perl -V>, will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be
analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send
it to perl5-security-report@perl.org. This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core committers, who be able
to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported. Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently
distributed on CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details
on what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
