=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5124delta - what is new for perl v5.12.4

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.12.3 release and
the 5.12.4 release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.12.2, first read
L<perl5123delta>, which describes differences between 5.12.2
and 5.12.3. The major changes made in 5.12.0 are described in L<perl5120delta>.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.12.3. If any
exist, they are bugs and reports are welcome.

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

When strict "refs" mode is off, C<%{...}> in rvalue context returns
C<undef> if its argument is undefined.  An optimisation introduced in Perl
5.12.0 to make C<keys %{...}> faster when used as a boolean did not take
this into account, causing C<keys %{+undef}> (and C<keys %$foo> when
C<$foo> is undefined) to be an error, which it should be so in strict
mode only [perl #81750].

C<lc>, C<uc>, C<lcfirst>, and C<ucfirst> no longer return untainted strings
when the argument is tainted. This has been broken since perl 5.8.9
[perl #87336].

Fixed a case where it was possible that a freed buffer may have been read
from when parsing a here document.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 2.43 to 2.50.

=head1 Testing

The F<cpan/CGI/t/http.t> test script has been fixed to work when the
environment has HTTPS_* environment variables, such as HTTPS_PROXY.

=head1 Documentation

Updated the documentation for rand() in L<perlfunc> to note that it is not
cryptographically secure.

=head1 Platform Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Linux

Support Ubuntu 11.04's new multi-arch library layout.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.12.4 represents approximately 5 months of development since
Perl 5.12.3 and contains approximately 200 lines of changes across
11 files from 8 authors.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers.  The following people are known to
have contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.12.4:

Andy Dougherty, David Golden, David Leadbeater, Father Chrysostomos,
Florian Ragwitz, Jesse Vincent, Leon Brocard, Zsbán Ambrus.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles
recently posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl
bug database at http://rt.perl.org/perlbug/ .  There may also be
information at http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the B<perlbug>
program included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down
to a tiny but sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the
output of C<perl -V>, will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be
analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send
it to perl5-security-report@perl.org. This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core committers, who be able
to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported. Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently
distributed on CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details
on what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
