=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5224delta - what is new for perl v5.22.4

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.22.3 release and the 5.22.4
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.22.2, first read
L<perl5223delta>, which describes differences between 5.22.2 and 5.22.3.

=head1 Security

=head2 Improved handling of '.' in @INC in base.pm

The handling of (the removal of) C<'.'> in C<@INC> in L<base> has been
improved.  This resolves some problematic behaviour in the approach taken in
Perl 5.22.3, which is probably best described in the following two threads on
the Perl 5 Porters mailing list:
L<http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2016/08/msg238991.html>,
L<http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2016/10/msg240297.html>.

=head2 "Escaped" colons and relative paths in PATH

On Unix systems, Perl treats any relative paths in the PATH environment
variable as tainted when starting a new process.  Previously, it was allowing a
backslash to escape a colon (unlike the OS), consequently allowing relative
paths to be considered safe if the PATH was set to something like C</\:.>.  The
check has been fixed to treat C<.> as tainted in that example.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<base> has been upgraded from version 2.22 to 2.22_01.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20170114_22 to 5.20170715_22.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Fixed a crash with C<s///l> where it thought it was dealing with UTF-8 when it
wasn't.
L<[GH #15543]|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/15543>

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.22.4 represents approximately 6 months of development since Perl 5.22.3
and contains approximately 2,200 lines of changes across 52 files from 16
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 970 lines of changes to 18 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers.  The following people are known to have contributed
the improvements that became Perl 5.22.4:

Aaron Crane, Abigail, Aristotle Pagaltzis, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, David
Mitchell, Eric Herman, Father Chrysostomos, James E Keenan, Karl Williamson,
Lukas Mai, Renee Baecker, Ricardo Signes, Sawyer X, Stevan Little, Steve Hay,
Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history.  In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core.  We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
https://rt.perl.org/ .  There may also be information at
http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send it
to perl5-security-report@perl.org.  This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core committers, who will be
able to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported.  Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently distributed on
CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
