=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5141delta - what is new for perl v5.14.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.14.0 release and
the 5.14.1 release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.12.0, first read
L<perl5140delta>, which describes differences between 5.12.0 and
5.14.0.

=head1 Core Enhancements

No changes since 5.14.0.

=head1 Security

No changes since 5.14.0.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.14.0. If any
exist, they are bugs and reports are welcome.

=head1 Deprecations

There have been no deprecations since 5.14.0.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 New Modules and Pragmata

None

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<B::Deparse> has been upgraded from version 1.03 to 1.04, to address two
regressions in Perl 5.14.0:

Deparsing of the C<glob> operator and its diamond (C<< <> >>) form now
works again. [perl #90898]

The presence of subroutines named C<::::> or C<::::::> no longer causes
B::Deparse to hang.

=item *

L<Pod::Perldoc> has been upgraded from version 3.15_03 to 3.15_04.

It corrects the search paths on VMS. [perl #90640]

=back

=head2 Removed Modules and Pragmata

None

=head1 Documentation

=head2 New Documentation

None

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

=head3 L<perlfunc>

=over

=item *

C<given>, C<when> and C<default> are now listed in L<perlfunc>.

=item *

Documentation for C<use> now includes a pointer to F<if.pm>.

=back

=head3 L<perllol>

=over

=item *

L<perllol> has been expanded with examples using the new C<push $scalar>
syntax introduced in Perl 5.14.0.

=back

=head3 L<perlop>

=over 4

=item *

The explanation of bitwise operators has been expanded to explain how they
work on Unicode strings.

=item *

The section on the triple-dot or yada-yada operator has been moved up, as
it used to separate two closely related sections about the comma operator.

=item *

More examples for C<m//g> have been added.

=item *

The C<<< <<\FOO >>> here-doc syntax has been documented.

=back

=head3 L<perlrun>

=over

=item *

L<perlrun> has undergone a significant clean-up.  Most notably, the
B<-0x...> form of the B<-0> flag has been clarified, and the final section
on environment variables has been corrected and expanded.

=back

=head3 L<POSIX>

=over 

=item *

The invocation documentation for C<WIFEXITED>, C<WEXITSTATUS>,
C<WIFSIGNALED>, C<WTERMSIG>, C<WIFSTOPPED>, and C<WSTOPSIG> was corrected.

=back


=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages.  For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

=head2 New Diagnostics

None

=head2 Changes to Existing Diagnostics

None

=head1 Utility Changes

None

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

F<regexp.h> has been modified for compatibility with GCC's C<-Werror>
option, as used by some projects that include perl's header files.

=back

=head1 Testing

=over 4

=item *

Some test failures in F<dist/Locale-Maketext/t/09_compile.t> that could
occur depending on the environment have been fixed. [perl #89896]

=item * 

A watchdog timer for F<t/re/re.t> was lengthened to accommodate SH-4 systems
which were unable to complete the tests before the previous timer ran out.


=back

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 New Platforms

None

=head2 Discontinued Platforms

None

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=head3 Solaris

=over 

=item *

Documentation listing the Solaris packages required to build Perl on
Solaris 9 and Solaris 10 has been corrected.

=back

=head3 Mac OS X

=over

=item * 

The F<lib/locale.t> test script has been updated to work on the upcoming
Lion release.

=item * 

Mac OS X specific compilation instructions have been clarified.

=back

=head3 Ubuntu Linux

=over 

=item *

The L<ODBM_File> installation process has been updated with the new library
paths on Ubuntu natty.

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 

=item *

The compiled representation of formats is now stored via the mg_ptr of
their PERL_MAGIC_fm. Previously it was stored in the string buffer,
beyond SvLEN(), the regular end of the string. SvCOMPILED() and
SvCOMPILED_{on,off}() now exist solely for compatibility for XS code.
The first is always 0, the other two now no-ops.

=back

=head1 Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

A bug has been fixed that would cause a "Use of freed value in iteration"
error if the next two hash elements that would be iterated over are
deleted. [perl #85026]

=item *

Passing the same constant subroutine to both C<index> and C<formline> no
longer causes one or the other to fail. [perl #89218]

=item *

5.14.0 introduced some memory leaks in regular expression character
classes such as C<[\w\s]>, which have now been fixed.

=item *

An edge case in regular expression matching could potentially loop.
This happened only under C</i> in bracketed character classes that have
characters with multi-character folds, and the target string to match
against includes the first portion of the fold, followed by another
character that has a multi-character fold that begins with the remaining
portion of the fold, plus some more.

 "s\N{U+DF}" =~ /[\x{DF}foo]/i

is one such case.  C<\xDF> folds to C<"ss">.

=item * 

Several Unicode case-folding bugs have been fixed.

=item *

The new (in 5.14.0) regular expression modifier C</a> when repeated like
C</aa> forbids the characters outside the ASCII range that match
characters inside that range from matching under C</i>.  This did not
work under some circumstances, all involving alternation, such as:

 "\N{KELVIN SIGN}" =~ /k|foo/iaa;

succeeded inappropriately.  This is now fixed.

=item *

Fixed a case where it was possible that a freed buffer may have been read
from when parsing a here document.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.14.1 represents approximately four weeks of development since
Perl 5.14.0 and contains approximately 3500 lines of changes
across 38 files from 17 authors.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers.  The following people are known to
have contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.14.1:

Bo Lindbergh, Claudio Ramirez, Craig A. Berry, David Leadbeater, Father
Chrysostomos, Jesse Vincent, Jim Cromie, Justin Case, Karl Williamson,
Leo Lapworth, Nicholas Clark, Nobuhiro Iwamatsu, smash, Tom Christiansen,
Ton Hospel, Vladimir Timofeev, and Zsbán Ambrus.


=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles
recently posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl
bug database at http://rt.perl.org/perlbug/ .  There may also be
information at http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug>
program included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down
to a tiny but sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the
output of C<perl -V>, will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be
analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send
it to perl5-security-report@perl.org. This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core committers, who be able
to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported. Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently
distributed on CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details
on what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
