=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5321delta - what is new for perl v5.32.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.32.0 release and the 5.32.1
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.30.0, first read
L<perl5320delta>, which describes differences between 5.30.0 and 5.32.0.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

There are no changes intentionally incompatible with Perl 5.32.0.  If any
exist, they are bugs, and we request that you submit a report.  See
L</Reporting Bugs> below.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<Data::Dumper> has been upgraded from version 2.174 to 2.174_01.

A number of memory leaks have been fixed.

=item *

L<DynaLoader> has been upgraded from version 1.47 to 1.47_01.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20200620 to 5.20210123.

=item *

L<Opcode> has been upgraded from version 1.47 to 1.48.

A warning has been added about evaluating untrusted code with the perl
interpreter.

=item *

L<Safe> has been upgraded from version 2.41 to 2.41_01.

A warning has been added about evaluating untrusted code with the perl
interpreter.

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 New Documentation

=head3 L<perlgov>

Documentation of the newly formed rules of governance for Perl.

=head3 L<perlsecpolicy>

Documentation of how the Perl security team operates and how the team evaluates
new security reports.

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes listed in
this document.  If you find any we have missed, open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.

Additionally, the following selected changes have been made:

=head3 L<perlop>

=over 4

=item *

Document range op behaviour change.

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages.  For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

=head2 Changes to Existing Diagnostics

=over 4

=item *

L<\K not permitted in lookahead/lookbehind in regex; marked by <-- HERE in mE<sol>%sE<sol>|perldiag/"\K not permitted in lookahead/lookbehind in regex; marked by <-- HERE in m/%s/">

This error was incorrectly produced in some cases involving nested lookarounds.
This has been fixed.

[L<GH #18123|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18123>]

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

Newer 64-bit versions of the Intel C/C++ compiler are now recognized and have
the correct flags set.

=item *

We now trap SIGBUS when F<Configure> checks for C<va_copy>.

On several systems the attempt to determine if we need C<va_copy> or similar
results in a SIGBUS instead of the expected SIGSEGV, which previously caused a
core dump.

[L<GH #18148|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18148>]

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes in this
release.

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item MacOS (Darwin)

The hints file for darwin has been updated to handle future macOS versions
beyond 10.  Perl can now be built on macOS Big Sur.

[L<GH #17946|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/17946>,
L<GH #18406|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18406>]

=item Minix

Build errors on Minix have been fixed.

[L<GH #17908|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/17908>]

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Some list assignments involving C<undef> on the left-hand side were
over-optimized and produced incorrect results.

[L<GH #16685|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/16685>,
L<GH #17816|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/17816>]

=item *

Fixed a bug in which some regexps with recursive subpatterns matched
incorrectly.

[L<GH #18096|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18096>]

=item *

Fixed a deadlock that hung the build when Perl is compiled for debugging memory
problems and has PERL_MEM_LOG enabled.

[L<GH #18341|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18341>]

=item *

Fixed a crash in the use of chained comparison operators when run under "no
warnings 'uninitialized'".

[L<GH #17917|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/17917>,
L<GH #18380|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18380>]

=item *

Exceptions thrown from destructors during global destruction are no longer
swallowed.

[L<GH #18063|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18063>]

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.32.1 represents approximately 7 months of development since Perl 5.32.0
and contains approximately 7,000 lines of changes across 80 files from 23
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 1,300 lines of changes to 23 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers.  The following people are known to have contributed
the improvements that became Perl 5.32.1:

Adam Hartley, Andy Dougherty, Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsåker, Dan Book, David
Mitchell, Graham Knop, Graham Ollis, Hauke D, H.Merijn Brand, Hugo van der
Sanden, John Lightsey, Karen Etheridge, Karl Williamson, Leon Timmermans, Max
Maischein, Nicolas R., Ricardo Signes, Richard Leach, Sawyer X, Sevan Janiyan,
Steve Hay, Tom Hukins, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history.  In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core.  We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION> for details of how to
report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5, you
can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
