<?xml version="1.0" ?>
<!DOCTYPE article PUBLIC "-//KDE//DTD DocBook XML V4.5-Based Variant V1.1//EN"
"dtd/kdedbx45.dtd" [
<!ENTITY kappname "&kwrite;">
<!ENTITY % English "INCLUDE" > <!-- change language only here -->
]>

<article id="kwrite" lang="&language;">

<articleinfo>
<title>The &kwrite; Handbook</title>
<authorgroup>
<author>&TC.Hollingsworth; &TC.Hollingsworth.mail;</author>
<othercredit role="developer">
&Christoph.Cullmann; &Christoph.Cullmann.mail;
<!-- <contrib>Core Developer and Maintainer</contrib> -->
</othercredit>

<!-- TRANS:ROLES_OF_TRANSLATORS -->

</authorgroup>

<copyright>
<year>2014</year>
<holder>&TC.Hollingsworth; &TC.Hollingsworth.mail;</holder>
</copyright>
<legalnotice>&FDLNotice;</legalnotice>

<date>2018-05-19</date>
<releaseinfo>Applications 18.08</releaseinfo>

<abstract>
<para>&kwrite; is a text editor by &kde; allowing you to edit one file at the time per window.</para>
</abstract>

<keywordset>
<keyword>KDE</keyword>
<keyword>KWrite</keyword>
<keyword>text</keyword>
<keyword>editor</keyword>
</keywordset>

</articleinfo>

<sect1 id="introduction">
<title>Introduction</title>

<para>
&kwrite; is more than a text editor by &kde;. It is meant
to be a programmer's editor, and could be considered as at least a
partial alternative to more powerful editors.  It may be best used in
conjunction with &konqueror; or &dolphin; for source file browsing for different
languages. &kwrite; also works very well as a simple text editor.  One
of &kwrite;'s main features is the colorized syntax, customized for many
different programming languages such as: C/C++, &Java;, Python, Perl,
Bash, Modula 2, &HTML;, and Ada.  &kwrite; has a single document interface
(<acronym>SDI</acronym>) allowing you to edit one file at the time per window.
</para>

<para>
&kwrite; is a simple interface to the &katepart; component also used by &kate;,
&kdevelop;, and other applications from &kde; that require advanced text editing.
Therefore, complete documentation for all the features of &kwrite; can be found
in the <ulink url="help:/katepart">&katepart; Handbook</ulink>.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="command-line-options">
<title>Command Line Options</title>

<para>
Though &kwrite; may most often be started from the &plasma; application starter, or
a desktop icon, it can also be opened at the command line prompt of a
terminal window.  There are a few useful options that are available when
doing this.
</para>

<para>Many other applications that use &katepart; offer similar command line
options.</para>

<sect2 id="specify-a-file">
<title>Specify a File</title>

<para>By specifying the path and name of a particular file the user can
have &kwrite; open (or create) that file immediately upon startup.  This
option might look something like the following:</para>

<informalexample><screen>
<prompt>%</prompt> <userinput><command>kwrite</command>
<option><replaceable>/home/myhome/docs/myfile.txt</replaceable></option>
</userinput>
</screen>
</informalexample>
</sect2>
<sect2 id="editing-files-on-the-internet">
<title>Specify a file on the Internet</title>

<para>The above-mentioned method could even be used to open files on the
Internet (if the user has an active connection at the time.)  An example of
this might look like the following:</para>

<informalexample><screen>
<prompt>%</prompt> <userinput><command>kwrite</command>
<option><replaceable>ftp://ftp.kde.org/pub/kde/README</replaceable>
</option></userinput>
</screen>
</informalexample>

</sect2>

<sect2 id="other-command-line-options">
<title>Other Command Line Options</title>

<para>The following command line help options are available</para>

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput><command>kwrite</command>
<option>--help</option></userinput></term>
<listitem><para>This lists the most basic options available at the command
line.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput><command>kwrite</command>
<option>--author</option></userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Lists &kwrite;'s authors in the terminal
window.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>

<term><userinput><command>kwrite</command>
<option>-v</option>, <option>--version</option></userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Lists version information for the application.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput><command>kwrite</command>
<option>--license</option></userinput></term>
<listitem>
<para>Shows license information.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput><command>kwrite</command>
<option>--desktopfile</option> <parameter>filename</parameter></userinput></term>
<listitem><para>The base file name of the desktop entry for this application.</para>
<para>This is in particular useful for wrapper applications and
applications having in general multiple desktop files. Thus each desktop
file can have its own command line for the <option>Exec</option> entry.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput><command>kwrite</command>
<option>-e</option>, <option>--encoding</option> <parameter>encoding</parameter>
</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Causes &kwrite; to use the specified encoding for the document.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput><command>kwrite</command>
<option>-l</option>, <option>--line</option> <parameter>line</parameter>
</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Navigate to the specified line after opening the document.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput><command>kwrite</command>
<option>-c</option>, <option>--column</option> <parameter>column</parameter>
</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Navigate to the specified column after opening the document.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput><command>kwrite</command>
<option>-i</option>, <option>--stdin</option></userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Causes &kwrite; to read the document content from STDIN. This
is similar to the common option <option>-</option> used in many command line
programs, and allows you to pipe command output into &kwrite;.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>
</sect2>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="credits">
<title>Credits and License</title>

<para>&kwrite; Copyright 2001-2014 by the &kate; team.</para>

<para>
Based on the original &kwrite;, which was Copyright 2000 by Jochen Wilhelmy
<email>digisnap@cs.tu-berlin.de</email>
</para>

<para>Contributions:</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>&Christoph.Cullmann; &Christoph.Cullmann.mail;</para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
<para>Michael Bartl <email>michael.bartl1@chello.at</email></para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
<para>Phlip <email>phlip_cpp@my-deja.com</email></para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
<para>&Anders.Lund; &Anders.Lund.mail;</para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
<para>Matt Newell <email>newellm@proaxis.com</email></para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
<para>&Joseph.Wenninger; &Joseph.Wenninger.mail;</para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
<para>Jochen Wilhelmy <email>digisnap@cs.tu-berlin.de</email></para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
<para>&Michael.Koch; &Michael.Koch.mail;</para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
<para>&Christian.Gebauer; &Christian.Gebauer.mail;</para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
<para>&Simon.Hausmann; &Simon.Hausmann.mail;</para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
<para>Glen Parker <email>glenebob@nwlink.com</email></para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
<para>Scott Manson <email>sdmanson@altel.net</email></para>
</listitem>

<listitem>
<para>&John.Firebaugh; &John.Firebaugh.mail;</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<!-- TRANS:CREDIT_FOR_TRANSLATORS -->

&underFDL;
&underGPL;
</sect1>

</article>
<!--
Local Variables:
mode: sgml
sgml-namecase-general: t
sgml-namecase-entity: nil
sgml-general-insert-case: lower
sgml-minimize-attributes: nil
sgml-omittag: nil
End:
-->
