.TH VPDDECODE 8 "February 2007" "dmidecode"
.\"
.SH NAME
vpddecode \- \s-1VPD\s0 structure decoder
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vpddecode
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vpddecode
prints the "vital product data" information that can be found in almost
all IBM and Lenovo computers. Available items are:
.IP \(bu "\w'\(bu'u+1n"
\s-1BIOS\s0 Build \s-1ID\s0
.IP \(bu
Box Serial Number
.IP \(bu
Motherboard Serial Number
.IP \(bu
Machine Type/Model
.PP
Some systems have these additional items:
.IP \(bu "\w'\(bu'u+1n"
BIOS Release Date
.IP \(bu
Default Flash Image File Name
.PP
Note that these additional items are not documented by IBM, so this is
guess work, and as such should not be blindly trusted. Feedback about
the accuracy of these labels is welcome.
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR "-d" ", " "--dev-mem \fIFILE\fP"
Read memory from device \fIFILE\fP (default: \fI/dev/mem\fP)
.TP
.BR "-s" ", " "--string \fIKEYWORD\fP"
Only display the value of the \s-1VPD\s0 string identified by \fIKEYWORD\fP.
It must be a keyword from the following list:
.nh
.BR bios-build-id ,
.BR box-serial-number ,
.BR motherboard-serial-number ,
.BR machine-type-model ,
.BR bios-release-date .
.hy
Each keyword corresponds to an offset and a length within the \s-1VPD\s0
record.
Not all strings may be defined on all \s-1VPD\s0-enabled systems.
If \fIKEYWORD\fP is not provided or not valid, a list of all valid
keywords is printed and
.B vpddecode
exits with an error.
This option cannot be used more than once.
Mutually exclusive with \fB--dump\fP.
.TP
.BR "-u" ", " "--dump"
Do not decode the VPD records, dump their contents as hexadecimal instead.
Note that this is still a text output, no binary data will be thrown upon
you. ASCII equivalent is displayed when possible. This option is mainly
useful for debugging.
Mutually exclusive with \fB--string\fP.
.TP
.BR "-h" ", " "--help"
Display usage information and exit
.TP
.BR "-V" ", " "--version"
Display the version and exit
.\"
.SH FILES
.I /dev/mem
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
Jean Delvare
.\"
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR biosdecode (8),
.BR dmidecode (8),
.BR mem (4),
.BR ownership (8)
