.TH TURBO 1 "4 January 2023"
.SH NAME
turbo \- An experimental text editor based on Scintilla and Turbo Vision.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBturbo\fR [\fIfile\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Turbo is an experimental text editor for the terminal, based on the Scintilla code editing component and the Turbo Vision application framework.
.PP
It was created to demonstrate new features in Turbo Vision.
In particular, it has served as testing ground for Turbo Vision's Unicode capabilities.
.PP
As a text editor, Turbo aims at being intuitive and easy to use.
And simply because it is a Turbo Vision application, it offers a vintage look and feel.
.SS User interface shortcuts
.TP
\fBCtrl+Q\fR, \fBAlt+X\fR
Exit Turbo.
.TP
\fBAlt+\fIletter\fR
Open menu with shortcut key \fIletter\fR.
For example, \fBAlt+F\fR opens the \fBF\fRile menu.
Once a menu is open, menu entries can be selected by pressing their respective shortcut key.
For example, \fBAlt+F+U\fR selects the S\fBu\fRspend entry in the \fBF\fRile menu.
.TP
\fBCtrl+N\fR
New document.
.TP
\fBCtrl+O\fR
Open file.
.TP
\fBCtrl+S\fR
Save current document.
.TP
\fBF2\fR
Rename current file.
.TP
\fBF6\fR, \fBCtrl+Tab\fR
Walk through document list.
.TP
\fBShift+F6\fR, \fBCtrl+Shift+Tab\fR
Walk through document list, in reverse order.
.TP
\fBAlt+Down\fR
Select next document in tree view.
.TP
\fBAlt+Up\fR
Select previous document in tree view.
.SS Text edition shortcuts
.TP
\fBCtrl+A\fR
Select all text.
.TP
\fBCtrl+C\fR, \fBCtrl+Ins\fR
Copy selection into clipboard.
.TP
\fBCtrl+D\fR
Duplicate selection or current line.
.TP
\fBCtrl+F\fR
Find text.
.TP
\fBCtrl+R\fR
Replace text.
.TP
\fBCtrl+G\fR
Go to line.
.TP
\fBCtrl+L\fR
Delete current line.
.TP
\fBCtrl+E\fR, \fBCtrl+/\fR, \fBCtrl+_\fR
Toggle comment.
.TP
\fBCtrl+V\fR, \fBShift+Ins\fR
Paste from clipboard.
.TP
\fBCtrl+X\fR, \fBShift+Del\fR
Cut selection.
.TP
\fBCtrl+Y\fR, \fBCtrl+Shift+Z\fR
Redo.
.TP
\fBCtrl+Z\fR
Undo.
.TP
\fBCtrl+Left\fR, \fBAlt+Left\fR
Move cursor one word left.
.TP
\fBCtrl+Right\fR, \fBAlt+Right\fR
Move cursor one word left.
.TP
\fBCtrl+Back\fR, \fBAlt+Back\fR
Delete one word left.
.TP
\fBCtrl+Del\fR
Delete one word right.
.TP
\fBShift\fR
Extend selection while cursor moves.
.TP
\fBCtrl+Shift+Down\fR, \fBAlt+Shift+Down\fR
Move selected lines down.
.TP
\fBCtrl+Shift+Up\fR, \fBAlt+Shift+Up\fR
Move selected lines up.
.TP
\fBF3\fR
Find next match.
.TP
\fBShift+F3\fR
Find previous match.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.PP
The following environment variables affect the behaviour of Turbo:
.TP
\fBCOLUMNS\fR, \fBLINES\fR
Overrides the system-supplied number of terminal columns and columns.
.TP
\fBDISPLAY\fR, \fBWAYLAND_DISPLAY\fR
Turbo will interact with the X11 or Wayland clipboard if available.
This requires \fIwl-clipboard\fR and \fIxsel\fR or \fIxclip\fR to be installed.
.TP
\fBLANG\fR, \fBLC_ALL\fR, \fBLC_CTYPE\fR
UTF-8 support is only enabled if a UTF-8 locale is in use.
.SH NOTES
Not all keyboard shortcuts are supported by all terminals.
For this reason, some commands can be triggered by more than one shortcut.
.SH BUGS
You can report bugs in Turbo's issue tracker (https://github.com/magiblot/turbo/issues).
