.TH libinput-measure-touchpad-pressure "1"
.SH NAME
libinput\-measure\-touchpad\-pressure \- measure pressure properties of devices
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B libinput measure touchpad\-pressure [\-\-help] [options]
[\fI/dev/input/event0\fI]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The
.B "libinput measure touchpad\-pressure"
tool measures the pressure of touches on a touchpad. This is
an interactive tool. When executed, the tool will prompt the user to
interact with the touchpad. On termination, the tool prints a summary of the
pressure values seen. This data should be attached to any
pressure\-related bug report.
.PP
For a full description on how libinput's pressure-to-click behavior works, see
the online documentation here:
.I https://wayland.freedesktop.org/libinput/doc/latest/touchpad_pressure.html
and
.I https://wayland.freedesktop.org/libinput/doc/latest/palm_detection.html
.PP
This is a debugging tool only, its output may change at any time. Do not
rely on the output.
.PP
This tool usually needs to be run as root to have access to the
/dev/input/eventX nodes.
.SH OPTIONS
If a device node is given, this tool opens that device node. Otherwise, this
tool searches for the first node that looks like a touchpad and uses that
node.
.TP 8
.B \-\-help
Print help
.TP 8
.B \-\-touch\-thresholds=\fI"down:up"\fR
Set the logical touch pressure thresholds to
.I down
and
.I up,
respectively. When a touch exceeds the pressure in
.I down
it is considered logically down. If a touch is logically down and goes below
the pressure in
.I up,
it is considered logically up. The thresholds have to be in
device-specific pressure values and it is required that
.I down
>=
.I up.
.TP 8
.B \-\-palm\-threshold=\fIN\fR
Assume a palm threshold of
.I N.
The threshold has to be in device-specific pressure values.
.TP 8
.B \-\-thumb\-threshold=\fIN\fR
Assume a thumb threshold of
.I N.
The threshold has to be in device-specific pressure values.
.PP
If the touch-thresholds or the palm-threshold are not provided,
this tool uses the thresholds provided by the device quirks (if any) or the
built-in defaults.
.SH LIBINPUT
Part of the
.B libinput(1)
suite
