.TH libinput-debug-events "1" "" "libinput @LIBINPUT_VERSION@" "libinput Manual"
.SH NAME
libinput\-debug\-events \- debug helper for libinput
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B libinput debug\-events \fI[options]\fB
.PP
.B libinput debug\-events \fI[options]\fB \-\-udev \fI<seat>\fB
.PP
.B libinput debug\-events \fI[options]\fB [\-\-device] \fI/dev/input/event0\fB [\fI/dev/input/event1\fB...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The
.B "libinput debug\-events"
tool creates a libinput context and prints all events from these devices.
.PP
This is a debugging tool only, its output may change at any time. Do not
rely on the output.
.PP
This tool usually needs to be run as root to have access to the
/dev/input/eventX nodes.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B \-\-device \fI/dev/input/event0\fR
Use the given device(s) with the path backend. The \fB\-\-device\fR argument may be
omitted.
.TP 8
.B \-\-grab
Exclusively grab all opened devices. This will prevent events from being
delivered to the host system.
.TP 8
.B \-\-help
Print help
.TP 8
.B \-\-quiet
Only print libinput messages, don't print anything from this tool. This is
useful in combination with --verbose for internal state debugging.
.TP 8
.B \-\-show\-keycodes
Key events shown by this tool are partially obfuscated to avoid passwords
and other sensitive information showing up in the output. Use the
.B \-\-show\-keycodes
argument to make all keycodes visible.
.TP 8
.B \-\-udev \fI<seat>\fR
Use the udev backend to listen for device notifications on the given seat.
The default behavior is equivalent to \-\-udev "seat0".
.TP 8
.B \-\-verbose
Use verbose output
.SS libinput configuration options
.TP 8
.B \-\-apply-to="pattern"
Configuration options are only applied where the device name matches the
pattern. This pattern has no effect on the \fB\-\-disable-sendevents\fR
option.
.TP 8
.B \-\-disable-sendevents="pattern"
Set the send-events option to disabled for the devices matching patterns.
This option is not affected by the \fB\-\-apply-to="pattern"\fR option.
.TP 8
.B \-\-enable\-tap|\-\-disable\-tap
Enable or disable tap-to-click
.TP 8
.B \-\-enable-drag|\-\-disable\-drag
Enable or disable tap-and-drag
.TP 8
.B \-\-enable\-drag-lock|\-\-disable\-drag\-lock
Enable or disable drag-lock
.TP 8
.B \-\-enable\-natural\-scrolling|\-\-disable\-natural\-scrolling
Enable or disable natural scrolling
.TP 8
.B \-\-enable\-left\-handed|\-\-disable\-left\-handed
Enable or disable left handed button configuration
.TP 8
.B \-\-enable\-middlebutton|\-\-disable\-middlebutton
Enable or disable middle button emulation
.TP 8
.B \-\-enable\-dwt|\-\-disable\-dwt
Enable or disable disable-while-typing
.TP 8
.B \-\-enable\-dwtp|\-\-disable\-dwtp
Enable or disable disable-while-trackpointing
.TP 8
.B \-\-enable\-scroll-button-lock|\-\-disable\-scroll-button-lock
Enable or disable the scroll button lock
.TP 8
.B \-\-set\-click\-method=[none|clickfinger|buttonareas]
Set the desired click method
.TP 8
.B \-\-set\-scroll\-method=[none|twofinger|edge|button]
Set the desired scroll method
.TP 8
.B \-\-set\-scroll\-button=BTN_MIDDLE
Set the button to the given button code
.TP 8
.B \-\-set\-profile=[adaptive|flat|custom]
Set pointer acceleration profile
.TP 8
.B \-\-set\-speed=<value>
Set pointer acceleration speed. The allowed range is [-1, 1].
This only applies to the flat or adaptive profile.
.TP 8
.B \-\-set\-custom\-points="<value>;...;<value>"
Sets the n points defining a custom acceleration function
The points are defined in a semicolon-separated list of floating point
non-negative numbers. Defaults to "0.0;1.0".
This only applies to the custom profile.
.TP 8
.B \-\-set\-custom\-step=<value>
Sets the distance along the x-axis between each point, starting from 0.
Defaults to 1.0.
This only applies to the custom profile.
.TP 8
.B \-\-set\-custom\-type=[fallback|motion|scroll]
Sets the type of the custom acceleration function.
Defaults to fallback.
This only applies to the custom profile.
.TP 8
.B \-\-set\-tap\-map=[lrm|lmr]
Set button mapping for tapping
.TP 8
.B \-\-set\-rotation\-angle=<degrees>
Set the rotation angle in degrees (0 to 360).
.SH NOTES
.PP
Events shown by this tool may not correspond to the events seen by a
different user of libinput. This tool initializes a separate context.
.SH LIBINPUT
Part of the
.B libinput(1)
suite
