Mesa 10.0.2 Release Notes / (January 9, 2014)
=============================================

Mesa 10.0.2 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 10.0.1
release.

Mesa 10.0.2 implements the OpenGL 3.3 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
3.3. OpenGL 3.3 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because compatibility contexts not supported.

MD5 checksums
-------------

::

   de7d14baf0101b697c140d2f47ef27e9  MesaLib-10.0.2.tar.gz
   8544c0ab3e438a08b5103421ea15b6d2  MesaLib-10.0.2.tar.bz2
   181b0d6c1afca38e98a930d0e564ed90  MesaLib-10.0.2.zip

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

This list is likely incomplete.

-  `Bug 70740 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=70740>`__ -
   HiZ on SNB causes GPU hang with WebGL web app
-  `Bug 72026 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=72026>`__ -
   SIGSEGV in fs_visitor::visit(ir_dereference_variable*)
-  `Bug 72264 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=72264>`__ -
   GLSL error reporting
-  `Bug 72369 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=72369>`__ -
   glitches in serious sam 3 with the sb shader backend

Changes
-------

The full set of changes can be viewed by using the following git
command:

::

     git log mesa-10.0.1..mesa-10.0.2

Aaron Watry (8):

-  clover: Remove unused variable
-  pipe_loader/sw: close dev->lib when initialization fails
-  radeon/compute: Stop leaking LLVMContexts in
   radeon_llvm_parse_bitcode
-  r600/compute: Free compiled kernels when deleting compute state
-  r600/compute: Use the correct FREE macro when deleting compute state
-  radeon/llvm: Free target data at end of optimization
-  st/vdpau: Destroy context when initialization fails
-  r600/pipe: Stop leaking context->start_compute_cs_cmd.buf on EG/CM

Alex Deucher (1):

-  r600g: fix SUMO2 pci id

Alexander von Gluck IV (1):

-  Haiku: Add in public GL kit headers

Anuj Phogat (1):

-  mesa: Fix error code generation in glBeginConditionalRender()

Carl Worth (2):

-  docs: Add md5sums for the 10.0.1 release.
-  Update version to 10.0.2

Chad Versace (1):

-  i965/gen6: Fix HiZ hang in WebGL Google Maps

Erik Faye-Lund (1):

-  glcpp: error on multiple #else/#elif directives

Henri Verbeet (1):

-  i915: Add support for gl_FragData[0] reads.

Ilia Mirkin (1):

-  nv50: fix a small leak on context destroy

Jonathan Liu (2):

-  st/mesa: use pipe_sampler_view_release()
-  llvmpipe: use pipe_sampler_view_release() to avoid segfault

Kenneth Graunke (2):

-  i965: Fix 3DSTATE_PUSH_CONSTANT_ALLOC_PS packet creation.
-  Revert "mesa: Remove GLXContextID typedef from glx.h."

Kevin Rogovin (1):

-  Use line number information from entire function expression

Kristian Høgsberg (1):

-  dri_util: Don't assume \__DRIcontext->driverPrivate is a gl_context

Marek Olšák (2):

-  mesa: fix interpretation of glClearBuffer(drawbuffer)
-  st/mesa: fix glClear with multiple colorbuffers and different formats

Paul Berry (2):

-  glsl: Teach ir_variable_refcount about ir_loop::counter variables.
-  glsl: Fix inconsistent assumptions about ir_loop::counter.

Vadim Girlin (1):

-  r600g/sb: fix stack size computation on evergreen
