Mesa 10.2 Release Notes / June 6, 2014
======================================

Mesa 10.2 is a new development release. People who are concerned with
stability and reliability should stick with a previous release or wait
for Mesa 10.2.1.

Mesa 10.2 implements the OpenGL 3.3 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
3.3. OpenGL 3.3 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because compatibility contexts are not supported.

MD5 checksums
-------------

::

   c87bfb6dd5cbcf1fdef42e5ccd972581  MesaLib-10.2.0.tar.gz
   7aaba90bd7169a94ae2fe83febdec963  MesaLib-10.2.0.tar.bz2
   58b203aca15dadc25ab4d1126db1052b  MesaLib-10.2.0.zip

New features
------------

Note: some of the new features are only available with certain drivers.

-  GL_ARB_buffer_storage on i965, nv30, nv50, nvc0, r300, r600, and
   radeonsi
-  GL_ARB_multi_bind on all drivers
-  GL_ARB_sample_shading on nv50 (GT21x only), nvc0
-  GL_ARB_separate_shader_objects (desktop OpenGL) and
   GL_EXT_separate_shader_objects (OpenGL ES 2.0 and 3.0) on all drivers
-  GL_ARB_stencil_texturing on i965/gen8+
-  GL_ARB_texture_cube_map_array on nv50 (GT21x only)
-  GL_ARB_texture_gather on nv50 (GT21x only), nvc0
-  GL_ARB_texture_query_lod on nv50 (GT21x only), nvc0
-  GL_ARB_texture_view on i965/gen7
-  GL_ARB_vertex_type_10f_11f_11f_rev on nv50, nvc0, radeonsi
-  GL_ARB_viewport_array on nv50, r600
-  GL_INTEL_performance_query on i965/gen5+

Bug fixes
---------

TBD.

Changes
-------

-  Renamed *--with-llvm-shared-libs* to *--enable-llvm-shared-libs*

   The option is used to control how mesa is linked against LLVM, and
   now defaults to enabled (shared linking).

-  Split *libxatracker.so* into a standalone library which can be used
   with any gallium driver.

   Previously the library was linked statically against vmware's virtual
   gpu driver(svga), whereas now it loads a shared pipe_*.so driver.
   Provide the following options during configure, if you would like
   support for svga driver *--enable-xa --with-gallium-drivers=svga*

   Note: The files are installed in $(libdir)/gallium-pipe/ and the
   interface between them and libxatracker.so is **not** stable.

-  The environment variable GALLIUM_MSAA that forced a multisample GLX
   visual was removed.
