Mesa 10.4.5 Release Notes / February 21, 2015
=============================================

Mesa 10.4.5 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 10.4.4
release.

Mesa 10.4.5 implements the OpenGL 3.3 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
3.3. OpenGL 3.3 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because compatibility contexts are not supported.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   e12bbdaee9a758617e8ebd0bb0e987f72addd11db2e4da25ba695e386cd63843  MesaLib-10.4.5.tar.gz
   bf60000700a9d58e3aca2bfeee7e781053b0d839e61a95b1883e05a2dee247a0  MesaLib-10.4.5.tar.bz2
   3b926de8eee500bb67cf85332c51292f826cc539b8636382aadbb8e70c76527a  MesaLib-10.4.5.zip

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

This list is likely incomplete.

-  `Bug 82477 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=82477>`__ -
   [softpipe] piglit fp-long-alu regression
-  `Bug 88658 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=88658>`__ -
   (bisected) Slow video playback on Kabini
-  `Bug 89069 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=89069>`__ -
   Lack of grass in The Talos Principle on radeonsi (native\wine\nine)

Changes
-------

Carl Worth (1):

-  Revert use of Mesa IR optimizer for ARB_fragment_programs

Emil Velikov (3):

-  docs: Add sha256 sums for the 10.4.4 release
-  get-pick-list.sh: Require explicit "10.4" for nominating stable
   patches
-  Update version to 10.4.5

Ilia Mirkin (3):

-  nvc0: bail out of 2d blits with non-A8_UNORM alpha formats
-  st/mesa: treat resource-less xfb buffers as if they weren't there
-  nvc0: allow holes in xfb target lists

Jeremy Huddleston Sequoia (2):

-  darwin: build fix
-  darwin: build fix

Kenneth Graunke (4):

-  i965: Override swizzles for integer luminance formats.
-  i965: Use a gl_color_union for sampler border color.
-  i965: Fix integer border color on Haswell.
-  glsl: Reduce memory consumption of copy propagation passes.

Laura Ekstrand (1):

-  main: Fixed \_mesa_GetCompressedTexImage_sw to copy slices correctly.

Marek Olšák (5):

-  r600g,radeonsi: don't append to streamout buffers that haven't been
   used yet
-  radeonsi: fix instanced arrays with non-zero start instance
-  radeonsi: small fix in SPI state
-  mesa: fix AtomicBuffer typo in \_mesa_DeleteBuffers
-  radeonsi: fix a crash if a stencil ref state is set before a DSA
   state

Michel Dänzer (2):

-  st/mesa: Don't use PIPE_USAGE_STREAM for GL_PIXEL_UNPACK_BUFFER_ARB
-  Revert "radeon/llvm: enable unsafe math for graphics shaders"
