Mesa 10.4.1 Release Notes / December 29, 2014
=============================================

Mesa 10.4.1 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 10.4.0
release.

Mesa 10.4.1 implements the OpenGL 3.3 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
3.3. OpenGL 3.3 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because compatibility contexts are not supported.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   5311285e791a6bfaa468ad002bd1e1164acb3eaa040b5a1bf958bdb7c27e0a9d  MesaLib-10.4.1.tar.gz
   91e8b71c8aff4cb92022a09a872b1c5d1ae5bfec8c6c84dbc4221333da5bf1ca  MesaLib-10.4.1.tar.bz2
   e09c8135f5a86ecb21182c6f8959aafd39ae2f98858fdf7c0e25df65b5abcdb8  MesaLib-10.4.1.zip

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

This list is likely incomplete.

-  `Bug 82585 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=82585>`__ -
   geometry shader with optional out variable segfaults
-  `Bug 82991 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=82991>`__ -
   Inverted bumpmap in webgl applications
-  `Bug 83908 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=83908>`__ -
   [i965] Incorrect icon colors in Steam Big Picture

Changes
-------

Andres Gomez (1):

-  i965/brw_reg: struct constructor now needs explicit negate and abs
   values.

Cody Northrop (1):

-  i965: Require pixel alignment for GPU copy blit

Emil Velikov (3):

-  docs: Add 10.4 sha256 sums, news item and link release notes
-  Revert "glx/dri3: Request non-vsynced Present for swapinterval zero.
   (v3)"
-  Update version to 10.4.1

Ian Romanick (2):

-  linker: Wrap access of producer_var with a NULL check
-  linker: Assign varying locations geometry shader inputs for SSO

Mario Kleiner (4):

-  glx/dri3: Fix glXWaitForSbcOML() to handle targetSBC==0 correctly.
   (v2)
-  glx/dri3: Track separate (ust, msc) for PresentPixmap vs.
   PresentNotifyMsc (v2)
-  glx/dri3: Request non-vsynced Present for swapinterval zero. (v3)
-  glx/dri3: Don't fail on glXSwapBuffersMscOML(dpy, window, 0, 0, 0)
   (v2)

Maxence Le Doré (1):

-  glsl: Add gl_MaxViewports to available builtin constants
