Mesa 17.1.3 Release Notes / June 19, 2017
=========================================

Mesa 17.1.3 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 17.1.2
release.

Mesa 17.1.3 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because compatibility contexts are not supported.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   81ae9127286ff8d631e466d258608d6dea9854fe7bee2e8521da44c7544f01e5  mesa-17.1.3.tar.gz
   5f1ee9a8aea2880f887884df2dea0c16dd1b13eb42fd2e52265db0dc1b380e8c  mesa-17.1.3.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 100988 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=100988>`__
   - glXGetCurrentDisplay() no longer works for FakeGLX contexts?

Changes
-------

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (3):

-  radv: Set both compute and graphics SGPRS on descriptor set flush.
-  radv: Dirty all descriptors sets when changing the pipeline.
-  radv: Remove SI num RB override for occlusion queries.

Brian Paul (1):

-  xlib: fix glXGetCurrentDisplay() failure

Chad Versace (1):

-  i965/dri: Fix bad GL error in intel_create_winsys_renderbuffer()

Chuck Atkins (1):

-  configure.ac: Reduce zlib requirement from 1.2.8 to 1.2.3.

Dave Airlie (3):

-  radv: expose integrated device type for APUs.
-  radv: set fmask state to all 0s when no fmask. (v2)
-  glsl/lower_distance: only set max_array_access for 1D clip dist
   arrays

Emil Velikov (1):

-  Update version to 17.1.3

Grazvydas Ignotas (1):

-  radv: fix trace dumping for !use_ib_bos

Faith Ekstrand (4):

-  i965/blorp: Take a layer range in intel_hiz_exec
-  i965: Move the pre-depth-clear flush/stalls to intel_hiz_exec
-  i965: Perform HiZ flush/stall prior to HiZ resolves
-  i965: Mark depth surfaces as needing a HiZ resolve after blitting

José Fonseca (1):

-  automake: Link all libGL.so variants with -Bsymbolic.

Juan A. Suarez Romero (1):

-  docs: add sha256 checksums for 17.1.2

Lucas Stach (1):

-  etnaviv: always do cpu_fini in transfer_unmap

Lyude (1):

-  nvc0: disable BGRA8 images on Fermi

Marek Olšák (3):

-  st/mesa: don't load cached TGSI shaders on demand
-  radeonsi: fix a GPU hang with tessellation on 2-CU configs
-  radeonsi: disable the patch ID workaround on SI when the patch ID
   isn't used (v2)

Nicolai Hähnle (1):

-  radv: fewer than 8 RBs are possible

Nicolas Dechesne (1):

-  util/rand_xor: add missing include statements

Tapani Pälli (1):

-  egl: fix \_eglQuerySurface in EGL_BUFFER_AGE_EXT case

Thomas Hellstrom (1):

-  dri3/GLX: Fix drawable invalidation v2

Tim Rowley (1):

-  swr: relax c++ requirement from c++14 to c++11
