Mesa 17.2.1 Release Notes / September 17, 2017
==============================================

Mesa 17.2.1 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 17.2.0
release.

Mesa 17.2.1 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because compatibility contexts are not supported.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   c902d8dc2540195bc570d88af1a8fd8a1774373660a27bb1d539551f46824bc1  mesa-17.2.1.tar.gz
   77385d17827cff24a3bae134342234f2efe7f7f990e778109682571dbbc9ba1e  mesa-17.2.1.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 100613 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=100613>`__
   - Regression in Mesa 17 on s390x (zSystems)
-  `Bug 101709 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=101709>`__
   - [llvmpipe] piglit gl-1.0-scissor-offscreen regression
-  `Bug 102454 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=102454>`__
   - glibc 2.26 doesn't provide anymore xlocale.h
-  `Bug 102467 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=102467>`__
   - src/mesa/state_tracker/st_cb_readpixels.c:178]: (warning) Redundant
   assignment
-  `Bug 102502 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=102502>`__
   - [bisected] Kodi crashes since commit 707d2e8b - gallium: fold
   u_trim_pipe_prim call from st/mesa to drivers

Changes
-------

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (4):

-  radv: Actually set the cmd_buffer usage_flags.
-  radv: Fix vkCopyImage with both depth and stencil aspects.
-  radv: Disable multilayer & multilevel DCC.
-  radv: Don't allocate CMASK for linear images.

Ben Crocker (1):

-  llvmpipe: lp_build_gather_elem_vec BE fix for 3x16 load

Brian Paul (1):

-  llvmpipe: initialize llvmpipe->dirty with LP_NEW_SCISSOR

Charmaine Lee (1):

-  vbo: fix offset in minmax cache key

Dave Airlie (12):

-  radv: disable 1d/2d linear optimisation on gfx9.
-  radv/gfx9: set descriptor up for base_mip to level range.
-  Revert "radv: disable support for VEGA for now."
-  radv/winsys: use amdgpu_bo_va_op_raw.
-  radv/gfx9: allocate events from uncached VA space
-  radv: use simpler indirect packet 3 if possible.
-  radv: don't use iview for meta image width/height.
-  radv: handle GFX9 1D textures
-  radv/gfx9: set mip0-depth correctly for 2d arrays/3d images
-  radv/ac: bump params array for image atomic comp swap
-  radv/gfx9: fix image resource handling.
-  radv/winsys: fix flags vs va_flags thinko.

Emil Velikov (7):

-  docs: add sha256 checksums for 17.2.0
-  cherry-ignore: add getCapability patches
-  cherry-ignore: ignore gfx9 tile swizzle fix
-  cherry-ignore: add execution_type() fix to the list
-  cherry-ignore: add EGL+gbm swast patches
-  egl/x11/dri3: adding missing \__DRI_BACKGROUND_CALLABLE extension
-  Update version to 17.2.1

Eric Engestrom (3):

-  util: improve compiler guard
-  mesa/st: remove unwanted backup file
-  docs/egl: remove reference to EGL_DRIVERS_PATH

Grazvydas Ignotas (1):

-  radv: don't assert on empty hash table

Faith Ekstrand (2):

-  anv/formats: Nicely handle unknown VkFormat enums
-  spirv: Add support for the HelperInvocation builtin

Karol Herbst (1):

-  nvc0: write 0 to pipeline_statistics.cs_invocations

Kenneth Graunke (2):

-  i965: Fix crash in fallback GTT mapping.
-  i965: Set "Subslice Hashing Mode" to 16x16 on Apollolake.

Marek Olšák (1):

-  st/mesa: skip draw calls with pipe_draw_info::count == 0

Michael Olbrich (1):

-  egl/dri2: only destroy created objects

Nicolai HÃƒÂ¤hnle (1):

-  radeonsi: apply a mask to gl_SampleMaskIn in the PS prolog

Nicolai Hähnle (4):

-  radeonsi/gfx9: always flush DB metadata on framebuffer changes
-  st/glsl_to_tgsi: only the first (inner-most) array reference can be a
   2D index
-  ac/surface: match Z and stencil tile config
-  glsl: fix glsl_struct_field size calculations for shader cache

Ray Strode (1):

-  gallivm: correct channel shift logic on big endian

Rob Clark (1):

-  freedreno: skip batch-cache for compute shaders

Roland Scheidegger (1):

-  st/mesa: fix view template initialization in try_pbo_readpixels

Samuel Pitoiset (1):

-  radeonsi: update dirty_level_mask before dispatching

Timothy Arceri (9):

-  glsl: allow NULL to be passed to encode_type_to_blob()
-  glsl: stop adding pointers from gl_shader_variable to the cache
-  glsl: stop adding pointers from glsl_struct_field to the cache
-  glsl: add has_uniform_storage() helper to shader cache
-  glsl: don't write uniform storage offset if there isn't one
-  glsl: always write a name/label string to the cache
-  compiler: move pointers to the start of shader_info
-  glsl: stop adding pointers from shader_info to the cache
-  glsl: stop adding pointers from bindless structs to the cache
