Mesa 17.2.5 Release Notes / November 10, 2017
=============================================

Mesa 17.2.5 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 17.2.4
release.

Mesa 17.2.5 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because compatibility contexts are not supported.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   25b40e72fad64b096c2d8d6fe9579369954debe7970d4ad53e5033c7eec2918b  mesa-17.2.5.tar.gz
   7f7f914b7b9ea0b15f2d9d01a4375e311b0e90e55683b8e8a67ce8691eb1070f  mesa-17.2.5.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 97532 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=97532>`__ -
   Regression: GLB 2.7 & Glmark-2 GLES versions segfault due to linker
   precision error (259fc505) on dead variable
-  `Bug 102680 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=102680>`__
   - [OpenGL CTS] KHR-GL45.shader_ballot_tests.ShaderBallotBitmasks
   fails
-  `Bug 102809 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=102809>`__
   - Rust shadows(?) flash random colours
-  `Bug 103142 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=103142>`__
   - R600g+sb: optimizer apparently stuck in an endless loop

Changes
-------

Andres Gomez (8):

-  docs: add sha256 checksums for 17.2.4
-  cherry-ignore: radv: copy indirect lowering settings from radeonsi
-  cherry-ignore: i965: fix blorp stage_prog_data->param leak
-  cherry-ignore: etnaviv: don't do resolve-in-place without valid TS
-  cherry-ignore: intel/fs: Alloc pull constants off mem_ctx
-  cherry-ignore: added 17.3 nominations.
-  cherry-ignore: automake: include git_sha1.h.in in release tarball
-  Update version to 17.2.5

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (3):

-  radv: Don't expose heaps with 0 memory.
-  radv: Don't use vgpr indexing for outputs on GFX9.
-  radv: Disallow indirect outputs for GS on GFX9 as well.

Dave Airlie (3):

-  i915g: make gears run again.
-  radv: free attachments on end command buffer.
-  radv: add initial copy descriptor support. (v2)

Eric Engestrom (1):

-  vc4: fix release build

Gert Wollny (1):

-  r600/sb: bail out if prepare_alu_group() doesn't find a proper
   scheduling

Faith Ekstrand (4):

-  spirv: Claim support for the simple memory model
-  i965/blorp: Use blorp_to_isl_format for src_isl_format in
   blit_miptrees
-  i965/blorp: Use more temporary isl_format variables
-  i965/miptree: Take an isl_format in render_aux_usage

Kenneth Graunke (1):

-  mesa: Accept GL_BACK in get_fb0_attachment with
   ARB_ES3_1_compatibility.

Leo Liu (1):

-  radeon/video: add gfx9 offsets when rejoin the video surface

Marek Olšák (2):

-  st/dri: don't expose modifiers in EGL if the driver doesn't implement
   them
-  ac/surface/gfx9: don't allow DCC for the smallest mipmap levels

Nanley Chery (1):

-  i965: Check CCS_E compatibility for texture view rendering

Neil Roberts (1):

-  nir/opt_intrinsics: Fix values for gl_SubGroupG{e,t}MaskARB

Nicolai Hähnle (1):

-  amd/common/gfx9: workaround DCC corruption more conservatively

Tapani Pälli (1):

-  i965: unref push_const_bo in intelDestroyContext

Timothy Arceri (1):

-  radv: copy indirect lowering settings from radeonsi

Tomasz Figa (1):

-  glsl: Allow precision mismatch on dead data with GLSL ES 1.00

Topi Pohjolainen (1):

-  intel/compiler/gen9: Pixel shader header only workaround
