Mesa 17.2.4 Release Notes / October 30, 2017
============================================

Mesa 17.2.4 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 17.2.3
release.

Mesa 17.2.4 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because compatibility contexts are not supported.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   cb266edc5cf7226219ebaf556ca2e03dff282e0324d20afd80423a5754d1272c  mesa-17.2.4.tar.gz
   5ba408fecd6e1132e5490eec1a2f04466214e4c65c8b89b331be844768c2e550  mesa-17.2.4.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 102774 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=102774>`__
   - [BDW] [Bisected] Absolute constant buffers break VAAPI in mpv
-  `Bug 103388 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=103388>`__
   - Linking libcltgsi.la (llvm/codegen/libclllvm_la-common.lo) fails
   with "error: no match for 'operator-'" with GCC-7, Mesa from Git and
   current LLVM revisions

Changes
-------

Andres Gomez (8):

-  cherry-ignore: configure.ac: rework llvm detection and handling
-  cherry-ignore: glsl: fix derived cs variables
-  cherry-ignore: added 17.3 nominations.
-  cherry-ignore: radv: Don't use vgpr indexing for outputs on GFX9.
-  cherry-ignore: radv: Disallow indirect outputs for GS on GFX9 as
   well.
-  cherry-ignore: mesa/bufferobj: don't double negate the range
-  cherry-ignore: broadcom/vc5: Propagate vc4 aliasing fix to vc5.
-  Update version to 17.2.4

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (1):

-  ac/nir: Fix nir_texop_lod on GFX for 1D arrays.

Dave Airlie (1):

-  radv/image: bump all the offset to uint64_t.

Emil Velikov (1):

-  docs: add sha256 checksums for 17.2.3

Henri Verbeet (1):

-  vulkan/wsi: Free the event in x11_manage_fifo_queues().

Jan Vesely (1):

-  clover: Fix compilation after clang r315871

Faith Ekstrand (4):

-  nir/intrinsics: Set the correct num_indices for load_output
-  intel/fs: Handle flag read/write aliasing in needs_src_copy
-  anv/pipeline: Call nir_lower_system_valaues after brw_preprocess_nir
-  intel/eu: Use EXECUTE_1 for JMPI

Kenneth Graunke (1):

-  i965: Revert absolute mode for constant buffer pointers.

Marek Olšák (1):

-  Revert "mesa: fix texture updates for ATI_fragment_shader"

Matthew Nicholls (1):

-  ac/nir: generate correct instruction for atomic min/max on unsigned
   images

Michel Dänzer (1):

-  st/mesa: Initialize textures array in st_framebuffer_validate

Samuel Pitoiset (1):

-  radv: add the draw count buffer to the list of buffers

Stefan Schake (1):

-  broadcom/vc4: Fix aliasing issue
