Mesa 17.2.2 Release Notes / October 2, 2017
===========================================

Mesa 17.2.2 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 17.2.1
release.

Mesa 17.2.2 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because compatibility contexts are not supported.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   8242256f3243ed3f35184ed7bf0a9070439ccdf477a3bd9cfd2437c0b2f9bc7f  mesa-17.2.2.tar.gz
   cf522244d6a5a1ecde3fc00e7c96935253fe22f808f064cab98be6f3faa65782  mesa-17.2.2.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 102573 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=102573>`__
   - fails to build on armel
-  `Bug 102844 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=102844>`__
   - memory leak with glDeleteProgram for shader program type
   GL_COMPUTE_SHADER
-  `Bug 102847 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=102847>`__
   - swr fail to build with llvm-5.0.0
-  `Bug 102904 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=102904>`__
   - piglit and gl45 cts linker tests regressed

Changes
-------

Alexandru-Liviu Prodea (1):

-  Scons: Add LLVM 5.0 support

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (1):

-  radv: Check for GFX9 for 1D arrays in image_size intrinsic.

Boris Brezillon (1):

-  broadcom/vc4: Fix infinite retry in vc4_bo_alloc()

Dave Airlie (3):

-  radv/nir: call opt_remove_phis after trivial continues.
-  ac/surface: handle S8 on gfx9
-  st/glsl->tgsi: fix u64 to bool comparisons.

David Airlie (1):

-  radv: add gfx9 scissor workaround

Emil Velikov (2):

-  docs: add sha256 checksums for 17.2.1
-  automake: enable libunwind in \`make distcheck'

Eric Anholt (4):

-  broadcom/vc4: Fix use-after-free for flushing when writing to a
   texture.
-  broadcom/vc4: Fix use-after-free trying to mix a quad and tile clear.
-  broadcom/vc4: Fix use-after-free when deleting a program.
-  broadcom/vc4: Keep pipe_sampler_view->texture matching the original
   texture.

Gert Wollny (2):

-  travis: force llvm-3.3 for "make Gallium ST Other"
-  travis: Add libunwind-dev to gallium/make builds

Grazvydas Ignotas (1):

-  configure: check if -latomic is needed for \__atomic_\*

Ian Romanick (1):

-  nv20: Fix GL_CLAMP

Faith Ekstrand (6):

-  i965/blorp: Set r8stencil_needs_update when writing stencil
-  vulkan/wsi/wayland: Stop printing out the DRM device
-  vulkan/wsi/wayland: Refactor wsi_wl_display code
-  vulkan/wsi/wayland: Stop caching Wayland displays
-  vulkan/wsi/wayland: Copy wl_proxy objects from oldSwapchain if
   available
-  vulkan/wsi/wayland: Return better error messages

Juan A. Suarez Romero (4):

-  cherry-ignore: add "radeonsi/gfx9: proper workaround for LS/HS VGPR
   initialization bug"
-  cherry-ignore: add "radv: Check for GFX9 for 1D arrays in image_size
   intrinsic."
-  cherry-ignore: add "radv: copy the number of viewports/scissors at
   pipeline bind time"
-  Update version to 17.2.2

Józef Kucia (1):

-  anv: Fix descriptors copying

Kenneth Graunke (2):

-  i965/vec4: Actually handle atomic op intrinsics.
-  i965/vec4: Fix swizzles on atomic sources.

Leo Liu (1):

-  st/va/postproc: use video original size for postprocessing

Lucas Stach (1):

-  etnaviv: fix 16bpp clears

Matt Turner (2):

-  util: Link libmesautil into u_atomic_test
-  util/u_atomic: Add implementation of \__sync_val_compare_and_swap_8

Nicolai Hähnle (9):

-  radeonsi: workaround for gather4 on integer cube maps
-  amd/common: round cube array slice in ac_prepare_cube_coords
-  amd/common: add workaround for cube map array layer clamping
-  glsl/linker: fix output variable overlap check
-  radeonsi: fix array textures layer coordinate
-  radeonsi: set MIP_POINT_PRECLAMP to 0
-  amd/addrlib: fix missing va_end() after va_copy()
-  amd/common: move ac_build_phi from radeonsi
-  radeonsi: fix a regression in integer cube map handling

Samuel Iglesias Gonsálvez (1):

-  anv: fix viewport transformation for z component

Samuel Pitoiset (1):

-  radv: fix saved compute state when doing statistics/occlusion queries

Tapani Pälli (1):

-  mesa: free current ComputeProgram state in \_mesa_free_context_data

Tim Rowley (1):

-  swr/rast: remove llvm fence/atomics from generated files

Tomasz Figa (1):

-  egl/dri2: Implement swapInterval fallback in a conformant way
