Mesa 17.3.4 Release Notes / January 15, 2018
============================================

Mesa 17.3.4 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 17.3.3
release.

Mesa 17.3.4 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because compatibility contexts are not supported.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   2d3a4c3cbc995b3e192361dce710d8c749e046e7575aa1b7d8fc9e6b4df28f84  mesa-17.3.4.tar.gz
   71f995e233bc5df1a0dd46c980d1720106e7f82f02d61c1ca50854b5e02590d0  mesa-17.3.4.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 90311 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=90311>`__ -
   Fail to build libglx with clang at linking stage
-  `Bug 101442 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=101442>`__
   - Piglit shaders@ssa@fs-if-def-else-break fails with sb but passes
   with R600_DEBUG=nosb
-  `Bug 102435 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=102435>`__
   - [skl,kbl] [drm] GPU HANG: ecode 9:0:0x86df7cf9, in csgo_linux64
   [4947], reason: Hang on rcs, action: reset
-  `Bug 103006 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=103006>`__
   - [OpenGL CTS] [HSW]
   KHR-GL45.vertex_attrib_binding.basic-inputL-case1
-  `Bug 103626 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=103626>`__
   - [SNB] ES3-CTS.functional.shaders.precision
-  `Bug 104163 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=104163>`__
   - [GEN9+] 2-3% perf drop in GfxBench Manhattan 3.1 from "i965:
   Disable regular fast-clears (CCS_D) on gen9+"
-  `Bug 104383 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=104383>`__
   - [KBL] Intel GPU hang with firefox
-  `Bug 104411 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=104411>`__
   - [CCS] lemonbar-xft GPU hang
-  `Bug 104487 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=104487>`__
   - [KBL] portal2_linux GPU hang
-  `Bug 104711 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=104711>`__
   - [skl CCS] Oxenfree (unity engine game) hangs GPU
-  `Bug 104741 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=104741>`__
   - Graphic corruption for Android apps Telegram and KineMaster
-  `Bug 104745 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=104745>`__
   - HEVC VDPAU decoding broken on RX 460 with UVD Firmware v1.130
-  `Bug 104818 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=104818>`__
   - mesa fails to build on ia64

Changes
-------

Andres Gomez (1):

-  i965: perform 2 uploads with dual slot \*64*PASSTHRU formats on gen<8

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (10):

-  radv: Fix ordering issue in meta memory allocation failure path.
-  radv: Fix memory allocation failure path in compute resolve init.
-  radv: Fix freeing meta state if the device pipeline cache fails to
   allocate.
-  radv: Fix fragment resolve init memory allocation failure paths.
-  radv: Fix bufimage failure deallocation.
-  radv: Init variant entry with memset.
-  radv: Don't allow 3d or 1d depth/stencil textures.
-  ac/nir: Use instance_rate_inputs per attribute, not per variable.
-  ac/nir: Use correct 32-bit component writemask for 64-bit SSBO
   stores.
-  ac/nir: Fix vector extraction if source vector has >4 elements.

Boyuan Zhang (2):

-  radeon/vcn: add and manage render picture list
-  radeon/uvd: add and manage render picture list

Chuck Atkins (1):

-  configure.ac: add missing llvm dependencies to .pc files

Dave Airlie (10):

-  r600/sb: fix a bug emitting ar load from a constant.
-  ac/nir: account for view index in the user sgpr allocation.
-  radv: add fs_key meta format support to resolve passes.
-  radv: don't use hw resolve for integer image formats
-  radv: don't use hw resolves for r16g16 norm formats.
-  radv: move spi_baryc_cntl to pipeline
-  r600/sb: insert the else clause when we might depart from a loop
-  radv: don't enable tc compat for d32s8 + 4/8 samples (v1.1)
-  radv/gfx9: fix block compression texture views. (v2)
-  virgl: also remove dimension on indirect.

Eleni Maria Stea (1):

-  mesa: Fix function pointers initialization in status tracker

Emil Velikov (18):

-  cherry-ignore: i965: Accept CONTEXT_ATTRIB_PRIORITY for
   brwCreateContext
-  cherry-ignore: swr: refactor swr_create_screen to allow for proper
   cleanup on error
-  cherry-ignore: anv: add explicit 18.0 only nominations
-  cherry-ignore: radv: fix sample_mask_in loading. (v3.1)
-  cherry-ignore: meson: multiple fixes
-  cherry-ignore: swr/rast: support llvm 3.9 type declarations
-  Revert "cherry-ignore: intel/fs: Use the original destination region
   for int MUL lowering"
-  cherry-ignore: ac/nir: set amdgpu.uniform and invariant.load for UBOs
-  cherry-ignore: add gen10 fixes
-  cherry-ignore: add r600/amdgpu 18.0 nominations
-  cherry-ignore: add i965 shader cache fixes
-  cherry-ignore: nir: mark unused space in packed_tex_data
-  radv: Stop advertising VK_KHX_multiview
-  cherry-ignore: radv: Don't expose VK_KHX_multiview on android.
-  configure.ac: correct driglx-direct help text
-  cherry-ignore: add meson fix
-  cherry-ignore: add a few more meson fixes
-  Update version to 17.3.4

Eric Engestrom (1):

-  radeon: remove left over dead code

Gert Wollny (1):

-  r600/shader: Initialize max_driver_temp_used correctly for the first
   time

Grazvydas Ignotas (2):

-  st/va: release held locks in error paths
-  st/vdpau: release held lock in error path

Igor Gnatenko (1):

-  link mesautil with pthreads

Indrajit Das (4):

-  st/omx_bellagio: Update default intra matrix per MPEG2 spec
-  radeon/uvd: update quantiser matrices only when requested
-  radeon/vcn: update quantiser matrices only when requested
-  st/va: clear pointers for mpeg2 quantiser matrices

Faith Ekstrand (19):

-  i965: Call brw_cache_flush_for_render in predraw_resolve_framebuffer
-  i965: Add more precise cache tracking helpers
-  i965/blorp: Add more destination flushing
-  i965: Track the depth and render caches separately
-  i965: Track format and aux usage in the render cache
-  Re-enable regular fast-clears (CCS_D) on gen9+
-  i965/miptree: Refactor CCS_E and CCS_D cases in render_aux_usage
-  i965/miptree: Add an explicit tiling parameter to create_for_bo
-  i965/miptree: Use the tiling from the modifier instead of the BO
-  i965/bufmgr: Add a create_from_prime_tiled function
-  i965: Set tiling on BOs imported with modifiers
-  i965/miptree: Take an aux_usage in prepare/finish_render
-  i965/miptree: Add an aux_disabled parameter to render_aux_usage
-  i965/surface_state: Drop brw_aux_surface_disabled
-  intel/fs: Use the original destination region for int MUL lowering
-  anv/pipeline: Don't look at blend state unless we have an attachment
-  anv/cmd_buffer: Re-emit the pipeline at every subpass
-  anv: Stop advertising VK_KHX_multiview
-  i965: Call prepare_external after implicit window-system MSAA
   resolves

Jon Turney (3):

-  configure: Default to gbm=no on osx
-  glx/apple: include util/debug.h for env_var_as_boolean prototype
-  glx/apple: locate dispatch table functions to wrap by name

José Fonseca (1):

-  svga: Prevent use after free.

Juan A. Suarez Romero (1):

-  docs: add sha256 checksums for 17.3.3

Kenneth Graunke (2):

-  i965: Bind null render targets for shadow sampling + color.
-  i965: Bump official kernel requirement to Linux v3.9.

Lucas Stach (2):

-  etnaviv: dirty TS state when framebuffer has changed
-  renderonly: fix dumb BO allocation for non 32bpp formats

Marek Olšák (1):

-  radeonsi: don't ignore pitch for imported textures

Matthew Nicholls (2):

-  radv: restore previous stencil reference after depth-stencil clear
-  radv: remove predication on cache flushes

Maxin B. John (1):

-  anv_icd.py: improve reproducible builds

Michel Dänzer (1):

-  winsys/radeon: Compute is_displayable in surf_drm_to_winsys

Roland Scheidegger (1):

-  r600: don't do stack workarounds for hemlock

Samuel Pitoiset (1):

-  radv: create pipeline layout objects for all meta operations

Samuel Thibault (1):

-  glx: fix non-dri build

Timothy Arceri (2):

-  ac: fix buffer overflow bug in 64bit SSBO loads
-  ac: fix visit_ssa_undef() for doubles
