Mesa 17.3.2 Release Notes / January 8, 2018
===========================================

Mesa 17.3.2 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 17.3.1
release.

Mesa 17.3.2 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because compatibility contexts are not supported.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   f997e80f14c385f9a2ba827c2b74aebf1b7426712ca4a81c631ef9f78e437bf4  mesa-17.3.2.tar.gz
   e2844a13f2d6f8f24bee65804a51c42d8dc6ae9c36cff7ee61d0940e796d64c6  mesa-17.3.2.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 97852 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=97852>`__ -
   Unreal Engine corrupted preview viewport
-  `Bug 103801 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=103801>`__
   - [i965] >Observer\_ issue
-  `Bug 104288 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=104288>`__
   - Steamroll needs allow_glsl_cross_stage_interpolation_mismatch=true

Changes
-------

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (1):

-  radv: Fix DCC compatible formats.

Brendan King (1):

-  egl: link libEGL against the dynamic version of libglapi

Dave Airlie (6):

-  radv/gfx9: add support for 3d images to blit 2d paths
-  radv: handle depth/stencil image copy with layouts better. (v3.1)
-  radv/meta: fix blit paths for depth/stencil (v2.1)
-  radv: fix issue with multisample positions and interp_var_at_sample.
-  radv/gfx9: add 3d sampler image->buffer copy shader. (v3)
-  radv: don't do format replacement on tc compat htile surfaces.

Emil Velikov (2):

-  docs: add sha256 checksums for 17.3.1
-  Update version to 17.3.2

Eric Engestrom (1):

-  egl: let each platform decided how to handle LIBGL_ALWAYS_SOFTWARE

Rob Herring (1):

-  egl/android: Fix build break with dri2_initialize_android
   \_EGLDisplay parameter

Samuel Pitoiset (2):

-  radv/gfx9: fix primitive topology when adjacency is used
-  radv: use a faster version for nir_op_pack_half_2x16

Tapani Pälli (2):

-  mesa: add AllowGLSLCrossStageInterpolationMismatch workaround
-  drirc: set allow_glsl_cross_stage_interpolation_mismatch for more
   games
