Mesa 18.0.4 Release Notes / May 17, 2018
========================================

Mesa 18.0.4 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 18.0.3
release.

Mesa 18.0.4 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because compatibility contexts are not supported.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   d1dc3469faccdd73439479426952d71a9e8f684e8d03b6687063c12b13430801  mesa-18.0.4.tar.gz
   1f3bcfe7cef0a5c20dae2b41df5d7e0a985e06be0183fa4d43b6068fcba2920f  mesa-18.0.4.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 91808 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=91808>`__ -
   trine1 misrender r600g
-  `Bug 100430 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=100430>`__
   - [radv] graphical glitches on dolphin emulator
-  `Bug 106243 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=106243>`__
   - [kbl] GPU HANG: 9:0:0x85dffffb, in Cinnamon
-  `Bug 106480 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=106480>`__
   - A2B10G10R10_SNORM vertex attribute doesn't work.

Changes
-------

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (3):

-  radv: Translate logic ops.
-  radv: Fix up 2_10_10_10 alpha sign.
-  radv: Disable texel buffers with A2 SNORM/SSCALED/SINT for pre-vega.

Dave Airlie (3):

-  r600: fix constant buffer bounds.
-  radv: resolve all layers in compute resolve path.
-  radv: use compute path for multi-layer images.

Deepak Rawat (1):

-  egl/x11: Send invalidate to driver on copy_region path in swap_buffer

Ian Romanick (1):

-  mesa: Add missing support for glFogiv(GL_FOG_DISTANCE_MODE_NV)

Jan Vesely (8):

-  clover: Add explicit virtual destructor to argument class
-  eg/compute: Drop reference on code_bo in destructor.
-  r600: Cleanup constant buffers on context destruction
-  eg/compute: Drop reference to kernel_param bo in destructor
-  pipe-loader: Free driver_name in error path
-  gallium/auxiliary: Add helper function to count the number of entries
   in hash table
-  winsys/radeon: Destroy fd_hash table when the last winsys is removed.
-  winsys/amdgpu: Destroy dev_hash table when the last winsys is
   removed.

Faith Ekstrand (1):

-  i965,anv: Set the CS stall bit on the ISP disable PIPE_CONTROL

Jose Maria Casanova Crespo (2):

-  intel/compiler: fix 16-bit int brw_negate_immediate and
   brw_abs_immediate
-  intel/compiler: fix brw_imm_w for negative 16-bit integers

Juan A. Suarez Romero (7):

-  docs: add sha256 checksums for 18.0.3
-  cherry-ignore: add explicit 18.1 only nominations
-  cherry-ignore: glsl: change ast_type_qualifier bitset size to work
   around GCC 5.4 bug
-  cherry-ignore: mesa: fix glGetInteger/Float/etc queries for vertex
   arrays attribs
-  cherry-ignore: mesa: revert GL_[SECONDARY\_]COLOR_ARRAY_SIZE glGet
   type to TYPE_INT
-  cherry-ignore: radv/resolve: do fmask decompress on all layers.
-  Update version to 18.0.4

Kai Wasserbäch (1):

-  opencl: autotools: Fix linking order for OpenCL target

Kenneth Graunke (1):

-  i965: Don't leak blorp on Gen4-5.

Lionel Landwerlin (2):

-  i965: require pixel scoreboard stall prior to ISP disable
-  anv: emit pixel scoreboard stall before ISP disable

Matthew Nicholls (1):

-  radv: fix multisample image copies

Neil Roberts (1):

-  spirv: Apply OriginUpperLeft to FragCoord

Rhys Perry (1):

-  mesa: fix error handling in get_framebuffer_parameteriv

Ross Burton (1):

-  src/intel/Makefile.vulkan.am: add missing MKDIR_GEN
