Mesa 18.3.3 Release Notes / January 31, 2019
============================================

Mesa 18.3.3 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 18.3.2
release.

Mesa 18.3.3 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each
driver.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   6b9893942fe8011c7736d51448deb6ef80ece2257e0fac27b02e997a6605d5e4  mesa-18.3.3.tar.gz
   2ab6886a6966c532ccbcc3b240925e681464b658244f0cbed752615af3936299  mesa-18.3.3.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 108877 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=108877>`__
   - OpenGL CTS gl43 test cases were interrupted due to segment fault
-  `Bug 109023 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=109023>`__
   - error: inlining failed in call to always_inline ‘__m512
   \_mm512_and_ps(__m512, \__m512)’: target specific option mismatch
-  `Bug 109129 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=109129>`__
   - format_types.h:1220: undefined reference to \`_mm256_cvtps_ph'
-  `Bug 109229 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=109229>`__
   - glLinkProgram locks up for ~30 seconds
-  `Bug 109242 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=109242>`__
   - [RADV] The Witcher 3 system freeze
-  `Bug 109488 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=109488>`__
   - Mesa 18.3.2 crash on a specific fragment shader (assert triggered)
   / already fixed on the master branch.

Changes
-------

Andres Gomez (2):

-  bin/get-pick-list.sh: fix the oneline printing
-  bin/get-pick-list.sh: fix redirection in sh

Axel Davy (1):

-  st/nine: Immediately upload user provided textures

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (3):

-  radv: Only use 32 KiB per threadgroup on Stoney.
-  radv: Set partial_vs_wave for pipelines with just GS, not tess.
-  nir: Account for atomics in copy propagation.

Bruce Cherniak (1):

-  gallium/swr: Fix multi-context sync fence deadlock.

Carsten Haitzler (Rasterman) (2):

-  vc4: Use named parameters for the NEON inline asm.
-  vc4: Declare the cpu pointers as being modified in NEON asm.

Danylo Piliaiev (1):

-  glsl: Fix copying function's out to temp if dereferenced by array

Dave Airlie (3):

-  dri_interface: add put shm image2 (v2)
-  glx: add support for putimageshm2 path (v2)
-  gallium: use put image shm2 path (v2)

Dylan Baker (4):

-  meson: allow building dri driver without window system if osmesa is
   classic
-  meson: fix swr KNL build
-  meson: Fix compiler checks for SWR with ICC
-  meson: Add warnings and errors when using ICC

Emil Velikov (4):

-  docs: add sha256 checksums for 18.3.2
-  cherry-ignore: radv: Fix multiview depth clears
-  cherry-ignore: spirv: Handle arbitrary bit sizes for deref array
   indices
-  cherry-ignore: WARNING: Commit XXX lists invalid sha

Eric Anholt (2):

-  vc4: Don't leak the GPU fd for renderonly usage.
-  vc4: Enable NEON asm on meson cross-builds.

Eric Engestrom (2):

-  configure: EGL requirements only apply if EGL is built
-  meson/vdpau: add missing soversion

Iago Toral Quiroga (1):

-  anv/device: fix maximum number of images supported

Faith Ekstrand (3):

-  anv/nir: Rework arguments to apply_pipeline_layout
-  anv: Only parse pImmutableSamplers if the descriptor has samplers
-  nir/xfb: Fix offset accounting for dvec3/4

Karol Herbst (2):

-  nv50/ir: disable tryCollapseChainedMULs in ConstantFolding for
   precise instructions
-  glsl/lower_output_reads: set invariant and precise flags on
   temporaries

Lionel Landwerlin (1):

-  anv: fix invalid binding table index computation

Marek Olšák (4):

-  radeonsi: also apply the GS hang workaround to draws without
   tessellation
-  radeonsi: fix a u_blitter crash after a shader with FBFETCH
-  radeonsi: fix rendering to tiny viewports where the viewport center
   is > 8K
-  st/mesa: purge framebuffers when unbinding a context

Niklas Haas (1):

-  radv: correctly use vulkan 1.0 by default

Pierre Moreau (1):

-  meson: Fix with_gallium_icd to with_opencl_icd

Rob Clark (1):

-  loader: fix the no-modifiers case

Samuel Pitoiset (1):

-  radv: clean up setting partial_es_wave for distributed tess on VI

Timothy Arceri (5):

-  ac/nir_to_llvm: fix interpolateAt\* for arrays
-  ac/nir_to_llvm: fix clamp shadow reference for more hardware
-  radv/ac: fix some fp16 handling
-  glsl: use remap location when serialising uniform program resource
   data
-  glsl: Copy function out to temp if we don't directly ref a variable

Tomeu Vizoso (1):

-  etnaviv: Consolidate buffer references from framebuffers

Vinson Lee (1):

-  meson: Fix typo.
