Mesa 18.3.4 Release Notes / February 18, 2019
=============================================

Mesa 18.3.4 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 18.3.3
release.

Mesa 18.3.4 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each
driver.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   e22e6fe4c3aca80fe872a0a7285b6c5523e0cfc0bfb57ffcc3b3d66d292593e4  mesa-18.3.4.tar.gz
   32314da4365d37f80d84f599bd9625b00161c273c39600ba63b45002d500bb07  mesa-18.3.4.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 109107 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=109107>`__
   - gallium/st/va: change va max_profiles when using Radeon VCN
   Hardware
-  `Bug 109401 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=109401>`__
   - [DXVK] Project Cars rendering problems
-  `Bug 109543 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=109543>`__
   - After upgrade mesa to 19.0.0~rc1 all vulkan based application stop
   working ["vulkan-cube" received SIGSEGV in
   radv_pipeline_init_blend_state at
   ../src/amd/vulkan/radv_pipeline.c:699]
-  `Bug 109603 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=109603>`__
   - nir_instr_as_deref: Assertion \`parent && parent->type ==
   nir_instr_type_deref' failed.

Changes
-------

Bart Oldeman (1):

-  gallium-xlib: query MIT-SHM before using it.

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (2):

-  radv: Only look at pImmutableSamples if the descriptor has a sampler.
-  amd/common: Use correct writemask for shared memory stores.

Dylan Baker (2):

-  get-pick-list: Add --pretty=medium to the arguments for Cc patches
-  meson: Add dependency on genxml to anvil

Emil Velikov (5):

-  docs: add sha256 checksums for 18.3.3
-  cherry-ignore: nv50,nvc0: add explicit settings for recent caps
-  cherry-ignore: add more 19.0 only nominations from Ilia
-  cherry-ignore: radv: fix using LOAD_CONTEXT_REG with old GFX ME
   firmwares on GFX8
-  Update version to 18.3.4

Eric Anholt (1):

-  vc4: Fix copy-and-paste fail in backport of NEON asm fixes.

Eric Engestrom (2):

-  xvmc: fix string comparison
-  xvmc: fix string comparison

Ernestas Kulik (2):

-  vc4: Fix leak in HW queries error path
-  v3d: Fix leak in resource setup error path

Iago Toral Quiroga (1):

-  intel/compiler: do not copy-propagate strided regions to ddx/ddy
   arguments

Ilia Mirkin (1):

-  nvc0: we have 16k-sized framebuffers, fix default scissors

Faith Ekstrand (3):

-  intel/fs: Handle IMAGE_SIZE in size_read() and is_send_from_grf()
-  intel/fs: Do the grf127 hack on SIMD8 instructions in SIMD16 mode
-  nir/deref: Rematerialize parents in
   rematerialize_derefs_in_use_blocks

Juan A. Suarez Romero (1):

-  anv/cmd_buffer: check for NULL framebuffer

Kenneth Graunke (1):

-  st/mesa: Limit GL_MAX_[NATIVE\_]PROGRAM_PARAMETERS_ARB to 2048

Kristian H. Kristensen (1):

-  freedreno/a6xx: Emit blitter dst with OUT_RELOCW

Leo Liu (2):

-  st/va: fix the incorrect max profiles report
-  st/va/vp9: set max reference as default of VP9 reference number

Marek Olšák (4):

-  meson: drop the xcb-xrandr version requirement
-  gallium/u_threaded: fix EXPLICIT_FLUSH for flush offsets > 0
-  radeonsi: fix EXPLICIT_FLUSH for flush offsets > 0
-  winsys/amdgpu: don't drop manually added fence dependencies

Mario Kleiner (2):

-  egl/wayland: Allow client->server format conversion for PRIME
   offload. (v2)
-  egl/wayland-drm: Only announce formats via wl_drm which the driver
   supports.

Oscar Blumberg (1):

-  radeonsi: Fix guardband computation for large render targets

Rob Clark (1):

-  freedreno: stop frob'ing pipe_resource::nr_samples

Rodrigo Vivi (1):

-  intel: Add more PCI Device IDs for Coffee Lake and Ice Lake.

Samuel Pitoiset (2):

-  radv: fix compiler issues with GCC 9
-  radv: always export gl_SampleMask when the fragment shader uses it
