Mesa 19.1.6 Release Notes / September 3, 2019
=============================================

Mesa 19.1.6 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 19.1.5
release.

Mesa 19.1.6 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each
driver.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   2a369b7b48545c6486e7e44913ad022daca097c8bd937bf30dcf3f17a94d3496  mesa-19.1.6.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 104395 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=104395>`__
   - [CTS] GTF-GL46.gtf32.GL3Tests.packed_pixels.packed_pixels tests
   fail on 32bit Mesa
-  `Bug 111213 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=111213>`__
   - VA-API nouveau SIGSEGV and asserts
-  `Bug 111241 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=111241>`__
   - Shadertoy shader causing hang
-  `Bug 111411 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=111411>`__
   - SPIR-V shader leads to GPU hang, sometimes making machine unstable

Changes
-------

Andres Rodriguez (1):

-  radv: additional query fixes

Daniel Schürmann (1):

-  nir/lcssa: handle deref instructions properly

Danylo Piliaiev (1):

-  nir/loop_unroll: Prepare loop for unrolling in wrapper_unroll

Ian Romanick (2):

-  nir/algrbraic: Don't optimize open-coded bitfield reverse when
   lowering is enabled
-  intel/compiler: Request bitfield_reverse lowering on pre-Gen7
   hardware

Ilia Mirkin (1):

-  gallium/vl: use compute preference for all multimedia, not just blit

Jonas Ådahl (1):

-  wayland/egl: Ensure correct buffer size when allocating

Juan A. Suarez Romero (6):

-  docs: add sha256 checksums for 19.1.5
-  cherry-ignore: add explicit 19.2 only nominations
-  cherry-ignore: iris: Replace devinfo->gen with GEN_GEN
-  cherry-ignore: iris: Update fast clear colors on Gen9 with direct
   immediate writes.
-  cherry-ignore: iris: Avoid unnecessary resolves on transfer maps
-  Update version to 19.1.6

Kenneth Graunke (6):

-  iris: Fix broken aux.possible/sampler_usages bitmask handling
-  iris: Drop copy format hacks from copy region based transfer path.
-  iris: Fix large timeout handling in rel2abs()
-  util: Add a \_mesa_i64roundevenf() helper.
-  mesa: Fix \_mesa_float_to_unorm() on 32-bit systems.
-  intel/compiler: Fix src0/desc setter ordering

Marek Olšák (1):

-  radeonsi: fix scratch buffer WAVESIZE setting leading to corruption

Paulo Zanoni (1):

-  intel/fs: grab fail_msg from v32 instead of v16 when v32->run_cs
   fails

Pierre-Eric Pelloux-Prayer (1):

-  glsl: replace 'x + (-x)' with constant 0

Tapani Pälli (1):

-  egl: reset blob cache set/get functions on terminate
