Mesa 19.1.5 Release Notes / August 23, 2019
===========================================

Mesa 19.1.5 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 19.1.4
release.

Mesa 19.1.5 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each
driver.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   7b54e14e35c7251b171b4cf9d84cbc1d760eafe00132117db193454999cd6eb4  mesa-19.1.5.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 109630 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=109630>`__
   - vkQuake flickering geometry under Intel
-  `Bug 110395 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=110395>`__
   - Shadows are flickering in SuperTuxKart
-  `Bug 111113 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=111113>`__
   - ANGLE BlitFramebufferTest.MultisampleDepthClear/ES3_OpenGL fails on
   Intel Ubuntu19.04
-  `Bug 111267 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=111267>`__
   - [CM246] Flickering with multiple draw calls within the same
   graphics pipeline if a compute pipeline is present

Changes
-------

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (4):

-  radv: Do non-uniform lowering before bool lowering.
-  ac/nir: Use correct cast for readfirstlane and ptrs.
-  radv: Avoid binning RAVEN hangs.
-  radv: Avoid VEGA/RAVEN scissor bug in binning.

Danylo Piliaiev (1):

-  i965: Emit a dummy MEDIA_VFE_STATE before switching from GPGPU to 3D

Eric Engestrom (1):

-  util: fix mem leak of program path

Erik Faye-Lund (2):

-  gallium/dump: add missing query-type to short-list
-  gallium/dump: add missing query-type to short-list

Greg V (2):

-  anv: remove unused Linux-specific include
-  intel/perf: use MAJOR_IN_SYSMACROS/MAJOR_IN_MKDEV

Faith Ekstrand (1):

-  anv: Emit a dummy MEDIA_VFE_STATE before switching from GPGPU to 3D

Juan A. Suarez Romero (3):

-  docs: add sha256 checksums for 19.1.4
-  cherry-ignore: panfrost: Make ctx->job useful
-  Update version to 19.1.5

Marek Olšák (2):

-  radeonsi: disable SDMA image copies on dGPUs to fix corruption in
   games
-  radeonsi: fix an assertion failure: assert(!res->b.is_shared)

Matt Turner (1):

-  meson: Test for program_invocation_name

Sergii Romantsov (1):

-  i965/clear: clear_value better precision
