Mesa 19.1.1 Release Notes / June 25, 2019
=========================================

Mesa 19.1.1 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 19.1.0
release.

Mesa 19.1.1 implements the OpenGL 4.5 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.5. OpenGL 4.5 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each
driver.

SHA256 checksums
----------------

::

   72114b16b4a84373b2acda060fe2bb1d45ea2598efab3ef2d44bdeda74f15581  mesa-19.1.1.tar.xz

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

-  `Bug 110709 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=110709>`__
   - g_glxglvnddispatchfuncs.c and glxglvnd.c fail to build with clang
   8.0
-  `Bug 110901 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=110901>`__
   - mesa-19.1.0/src/util/futex.h:82: use of out of scope variable ?
-  `Bug 110902 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=110902>`__
   - mesa-19.1.0/src/broadcom/compiler/vir_opt_redundant_flags.c:104]:
   (style) Same expression
-  `Bug 110921 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=110921>`__
   - virgl on OpenGL 3.3 host regressed to OpenGL 2.1

Changes
-------

Alejandro Piñeiro (1):

-  v3d: fix checking twice auf flag

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (5):

-  radv: Skip transitions coming from external queue.
-  radv: Decompress DCC when the image format is not allowed for
   buffers.
-  radv: Fix vulkan build in meson.
-  anv: Fix vulkan build in meson.
-  meson: Allow building radeonsi with just the android platform.

Dave Airlie (1):

-  nouveau: fix frees in unsupported IR error paths.

Eduardo Lima Mitev (1):

-  freedreno/a5xx: Fix indirect draw max_indices calculation

Eric Engestrom (3):

-  util/futex: fix dangling pointer use
-  glx: fix glvnd pointer types
-  util/os_file: resize buffer to what was actually needed

Gert Wollny (1):

-  virgl: Assume sRGB write control for older guest kernels or
   virglrenderer hosts

Haihao Xiang (1):

-  i965: support UYVY for external import only

Faith Ekstrand (1):

-  anv: Set STATE_BASE_ADDRESS upper bounds on gen7

Juan A. Suarez Romero (2):

-  docs: Add SHA256 sums for 19.1.0
-  Update version to 19.1.1

Kenneth Graunke (2):

-  glsl: Fix out of bounds read in shader_cache_read_program_metadata
-  iris: Fix iris_flush_and_dirty_history to actually dirty history.

Kevin Strasser (2):

-  gallium/winsys/kms: Fix dumb buffer bpp
-  st/mesa: Add rgbx handling for fp formats

Lionel Landwerlin (2):

-  anv: do not parse genxml data without INTEL_DEBUG=bat
-  intel/dump: fix segfault when the app hasn't accessed the device

Mathias Fröhlich (1):

-  egl: Don't add hardware device if there is no render node v2.

Richard Thier (1):

-  r300g: restore performance after RADEON_FLAG_NO_INTERPROCESS_SHARING
   was added

Rob Clark (1):

-  freedreno/a6xx: un-swap X24S8_UINT

Samuel Pitoiset (4):

-  radv: fix occlusion queries on VegaM
-  radv: fix VK_EXT_memory_budget if one heap isn't available
-  radv: fix FMASK expand with SRGB formats
-  radv: disable viewport clamping even if FS doesn't write Z
