Mesa 20.0.2 Release Notes / 2020-03-18
======================================

Mesa 20.0.2 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 20.0.1
release.

Mesa 20.0.2 implements the OpenGL 4.6 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.6. OpenGL 4.6 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each
driver.

Mesa 20.0.2 implements the Vulkan 1.2 API, but the version reported by
the apiVersion property of the VkPhysicalDeviceProperties struct depends
on the particular driver being used.

SHA256 checksum
---------------

::

     aa54f1cb669550606aab8ceb475105d15aeb814fca5a778ce70d0fd10e98e86f  mesa-20.0.2.tar.xz

New features
------------

Bug fixes
---------

-  RPCS3 / Persona 5 - Performance regression [RADV / Navi]
-  [CTS] dEQP-VK.descriptor_indexing.\* fails on RADV/LLVM
-  [RadeonSI][gfx10/navi] Kerbal Space Program crash: si_draw_vbo:
   Assertion \`0' failed
-  src/compiler/glsl/glcpp/glcpp-parse.y:1297: \_token_print: Assertion
   \`!"Error: Don't know how to print token."' failed.
-  Budget Cuts hits VK_AMD_shader_fragment_mask assert

Changes
-------

Andreas Baierl (1):

-  gitlab-ci: Add add a set of lima flakes

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (2):

-  amd/llvm: Fix divergent descriptor indexing. (v3)
-  amd/llvm: Fix divergent descriptor regressions with radeonsi.

Danylo Piliaiev (2):

-  glsl: do not crash if string literal is used outside of
   #include/#line
-  st/mesa: Fix signed integer overflow when using
   util_throttle_memory_usage

Dave Airlie (1):

-  gallium: fix build with latest meson and gcc10

Dylan Baker (8):

-  docs: Add sha256sums for 20.0.1
-  .pick_status.json: Update to 07f1ef5656e0721282d01a8421eaca056348137d
-  .pick_status.json: Update to 70341d7746c177a4cd7377ef633e9f85afd11d54
-  .pick_status.json: Update to 625d8705f02e211e2733c3fe12845505725c37d4
-  .pick_status.json: Mark b83c9aca4a5fd02d920c90c1799137fed52dc1d9 as
   backported
-  .pick_status.json: Update to ee9e0d1ecae307fa48200d2604d3114070253299
-  .pick_status.json: Update to 3dd0d12aa5fefa94123269a541c94cdf57599e34
-  .pick_status.json: Update to 94e37859a96cc56cf0c5418a5af00a3e9f5a1bf5

Eric Anholt (1):

-  glsl/tests: Fix waiting for disk_cache_put() to finish.

Eric Engestrom (7):

-  bin/gen_release_notes.py: fix commit list command
-  .pick_status.json: Update to 24db276d11976905b2e8a44965c684bb48c3d49f
-  gen_release_notes: fix vulkan version reported
-  docs/relnotes/20.0: fix vulkan version reported
-  .pick_status.json: Update to ba03e308b66b0b88f60b99d9d47851a5e1522e6e
-  vulkan/wsi: fix cleanup when dup() fails
-  gen_release_notes: fix version in "you should wait" message

Francisco Jerez (1):

-  intel/fs: Fix workaround for VxH indirect addressing bug under
   control flow.

Faith Ekstrand (9):

-  isl: Set 3DSTATE_DEPTH_BUFFER::Depth correctly for 3D surfaces
-  iris: Don't skip fast depth clears if the color changed
-  anv: Parse VkPhysicalDeviceFeatures2 in CreateDevice
-  vulkan/wsi: Don't leak the FD when
   GetImageDrmFormatModifierProperties fails
-  vulkan/wsi: Return an error if dup() fails
-  anv: Use the PIPE_CONTROL instead of bits for the CS stall W/A
-  anv: Use a proper end-of-pipe sync instead of just CS stall
-  anv: Do end-of-pipe sync around MCS/CCS ops instead of CS stall
-  anv: Do an end-of-pipe sync before updating AUX table entries

José Fonseca (1):

-  meson: Avoid duplicate symbols.

Kristian Høgsberg (2):

-  Revert "glsl: Use a simpler formula for tanh"
-  Revert "spirv: Use a simpler and more correct implementaiton of
   tanh()"

Marek Olšák (4):

-  Revert "mesa: check for z=0 in \_mesa_Vertex3dv()"
-  radeonsi: add a bug workaround for NGG - LATE_ALLOC_GS
-  ac: add a bug workaround for the 100% NGG culling case
-  gallium/cso_context: remove cso_delete_xxx_shader helpers to fix the
   live cache

Martin Fuzzey (3):

-  freedreno: android: fix build failure on android due to python
   version
-  freedreno: android: add a6xx-pack.xml.h generation to android build
-  freedreno: android: fix build of perfcounters.

Michel Dänzer (1):

-  llvmpipe: Use uintptr_t for pointer values

Rafael Antognolli (3):

-  anv: Wait for the GPU to be idle before invalidating the aux table.
-  iris: Split aux map initialization from invalidation.
-  iris: Wait for the GPU to be idle before invalidating the aux table.

Rob Clark (1):

-  freedreno: fix FD_MESA_DEBUG=inorder

Samuel Pitoiset (5):

-  aco: fix image load/store with lod and 1D images
-  nir/lower_input_attachments: remove bogus assert in
   try_lower_input_texop()
-  ac/llvm: add missing optimization barrier for 64-bit readlanes
-  radv: only inject implicit subpass dependencies if necessary
-  radv: fix random depth range unrestricted failures due to a cache
   issue

Timur Kristóf (2):

-  nir: Add ability to lower non-const quad broadcasts to const ones.
-  radv: Enable lowering dynamic quad broadcasts.

Vinson Lee (1):

-  st/nine: Fix incompatible-pointer-types-discards-qualifiers errors.
