Mesa 20.0.1 Release Notes / 2020-03-05
======================================

Mesa 20.0.1 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 20.0.0
release.

Mesa 20.0.1 implements the OpenGL 4.6 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.6. OpenGL 4.6 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each
driver.

Mesa 20.0.1 implements the Vulkan 1.2 API, but the version reported by
the apiVersion property of the VkPhysicalDeviceProperties struct depends
on the particular driver being used.

SHA256 checksum
---------------

::

     6153ba3f8cb0524bbfc08e4db76b408126b2d1be8f789dffe28d1a0461eedde4  mesa-20.0.1.tar.xz

New features
------------

Bug fixes
---------

-  V3D/Broadcom (Raspberry Pi 4) - GLES 3.1 - GL_EXT_texture_norm16
   advertised, but not usable
-  i965 assertion failure in fallback_rgbx_to_rgba
-  Compute copies do not handle SUBSAMPLED formats

Changes
-------

Andreas Baierl (1):

-  gitlab-ci: lima: Add flaky tests to the skips list

Andrii Simiklit (1):

-  Revert "glx: convert glx_config_create_list to one big calloc"

Arcady Goldmints-Orlov (1):

-  spirv: Remove outdated SPIR-V decoration warnings

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (1):

-  radeonsi: Fix compute copies for subsampled formats.

Caio Marcelo de Oliveira Filho (1):

-  intel/gen12: Take into account opcode when decoding SWSB

Chris Wilson (1):

-  iris: Fix import sync-file into syncobj

Danylo Piliaiev (1):

-  i965: Do not generate D16 B5G6R5_UNORM configs on gen < 8

Dave Airlie (7):

-  dri: add another get shm variant.
-  glx/drisw: add getImageShm2 path
-  glx/drisw: return false if shmid == -1
-  glx/drisw: fix shm put image fallback
-  gallivm/tgsi: fix stream id regression
-  gallivm/nir: fix integer divide SIGFPE
-  gallivm/nir: handle mod 0 better.

Dylan Baker (7):

-  docs: Add release notes for 20.0.0
-  .pick_status.json: Update to 8291d728dc997e87b4d2e4e451692643a1dba881
-  .pick_status.json: Update to e4baff90812d799d586296fcad992ddcc553c359
-  .pick_status.json: Update to 01496e3d1ea0370af03e6645dbd2b864c2ace94c
-  .pick_status.json: Update to 09323634898ab3efc0150dc7d756bf36b1b89b76
-  .pick_status.json: Update to 3503cb4c28e01b34f3a25546c058150709c22348
-  .pick_status.json: Update to 0ac731b1ff96de46998948aa06081efa5140d50e

Eric Anholt (3):

-  llvmpipe: Fix real uninitialized use of "atype" for SEMANTIC_FACE
-  turnip: Fix compiler warning about casting a nondispatchable handle.
-  aco: Fix signed-vs-unsigned warning.

Erik Faye-Lund (1):

-  util: promote u_debug_memory.c to src/util

Ian Romanick (2):

-  nir/search: Use larger type to hold linearized index
-  intel/fs: Correctly handle multiply of fsign with a source modifier

James Xiong (1):

-  iris: handle the failure of converting unsupported yuv formats to isl

Faith Ekstrand (1):

-  anv: Always enable the data cache

Jonathan Marek (1):

-  turnip: fix srgb MRT

Jordan Justen (1):

-  intel/compiler: Restrict cs_threads to 64

Jose Maria Casanova Crespo (1):

-  v3d: Sync on last CS when non-compute stage uses resource written by
   CS

Kenneth Graunke (2):

-  iris: Make mocs an inline helper in iris_resource.h
-  iris: Fix BLORP vertex buffers to respect ISL MOCS settings

Marek Olšák (5):

-  mesa: fix immediate mode with tessellation and varying patch vertices
-  util: remove the dependency on kcmp.h
-  tgsi_to_nir: set num_images and num_samplers with holes correctly
-  mesa: call FLUSH_VERTICES before updating CoordReplace
-  mesa: fix incorrect prim.begin/end for glMultiDrawElements

Mathias Fröhlich (2):

-  egl: Fix A2RGB10 platform_{device,surfaceless} PBuffer configs.
-  mesa: Flush vertices before changing the OpenGL state.

Michel Dänzer (1):

-  st/vdpau: Only call is_video_format_supported hook if needed

Paulo Zanoni (3):

-  intel: fix the gen 11 compute shader scratch IDs
-  intel: fix the gen 12 compute shader scratch IDs
-  intel/device: bdw_gt1 actually has 6 eus per subslice

Rafael Antognolli (2):

-  iris: Apply the flushes when switching pipelines.
-  intel/gen12+: Disable mid thread preemption.

Rhys Perry (2):

-  aco: keep track of which events are used in a barrier
-  aco: fix carry-out size for wave32 v_add_co_u32_e64

Samuel Pitoiset (3):

-  ac/llvm: fix 64-bit fmed3
-  ac/llvm: fix 16-bit fmed3 on GFX8 and older gens
-  ac/llvm: flush denorms for nir_op_fmed3 on GFX8 and older gens

Tapani Pälli (4):

-  mesa: introduce boolean toggle for EXT_texture_norm16
-  i965: toggle on EXT_texture_norm16
-  mesa/st: toggle EXT_texture_norm16 based on format support
-  mesa/st: fix formats required for EXT_texture_norm16
