Mesa 20.1.2 Release Notes / 2020-06-24
======================================

Mesa 20.1.2 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 20.1.1
release.

Mesa 20.1.2 implements the OpenGL 4.6 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
4.6. OpenGL 4.6 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each
driver.

Mesa 20.1.2 implements the Vulkan 1.2 API, but the version reported by
the apiVersion property of the VkPhysicalDeviceProperties struct depends
on the particular driver being used.

SHA256 checksum
---------------

::

    283dff72814c8a80ce1ff8271e3f055895d26f4da3f4362acc49193e635780cb  mesa-20.1.2.tar.xz

New features
------------

- None


Bug fixes
---------

- [RADV/GFX8] Performance drop in DOOM Eternal when "Present from
  compute" is enabled
- freedreno: multiple applications crash on a5xx
- [RADV] - Path of Exile (238960) - Map outline, landscape and markers are
  missing with the Vulkan renderer.
- ASTC texture decompression fails when using software fallback
- [BISECTED] compiling shader causes crash
- Zink + GALLIUM_HUD SIGSEGV
- If-statement body is executed for false condition

Changes
-------

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (3):

- vulkan/wsi/x11: Ensure we create at least minImageCount images.
- radv/winsys: Deal with realloc failures in BO lists.
- radv: Handle mmap failures.

Daniel Schürmann (1):

- aco: fix WQM handling in nested loops

Danylo Piliaiev (1):

- st/mesa: account for "loose", per-mipmap level textures in CopyImageSubData

Eric Anholt (2):

- freedreno/ir3: Fix register allocation assertion failures.
- freedreno/ir3: Fix register allocation assertion failures.

Eric Engestrom (3):

- docs/relnotes: add sha256 sums to 20.1.0
- .pick_status.json: Update to 4fc0499049fcdb7f892f99ce7abf9d739730138e
- v3d: add missing unlock() in error path

Erik Faye-Lund (3):

- Revert "gallium/hud: don't use user vertex buffers"
- gallium/hud: don't use user vertex buffers
- mesa/main: fix inverted condition

Gert Wollny (1):

- r600/sfn: Don't set num_components on TESS sysvalue intrinsics

Jan Beich (2):

- util: enable futex usage on BSDs after 7dc2f4788288
- meson: unbreak sysctl.h detection on BSDs

Jose Maria Casanova Crespo (1):

- nir: only uniforms with dynamically_uniform offset are dynamically_uniform

Kristian Høgsberg (1):

- freedreno: Handle DRM_FORMAT_MOD_INVALID in shared code

Krzysztof Raszkowski (1):

- gallium/swr: Fix building swr with MSVC

Marek Olšák (7):

- ac/surface: don't recompute the DCC retile map for imported textures
- amd/addrlib: don't recompute DCC info for every ComputeDccAddrFromCoord call
- amd/addrlib: remove unused members of ADDR2_COMPUTE_DCC_ADDRFROMCOORD_INPUT
- ac/surface: add a wrapper structure to hold ADDR_HANDLE
- ac/surface: cache DCC retile maps (v2)
- ac/surface: don't free dcc_retile_map on failure
- ac/nir: fix 64-bit division for GL CTS

Mario Kleiner (1):

- vulkan/wsi: Really terminate DRM lease in wsi_release_display().

Pierre-Eric Pelloux-Prayer (1):

- st/mesa: make texture views inherit compressed_data storage

Rhys Perry (3):

- radv: add new drirc option radv_no_dynamic_bounds
- radv: enable radv_no_dynamic_bounds for Path of Exile
- radv: enable radv_no_dynamic_bounds for more Path of Exile executables

Samuel Pitoiset (3):

- radv: set DB_SHADER_CONTROL.CONSERVATIVE_Z_EXPORT correctly
- spirv: fix using OpSampledImage with OpUndef instead of OpType{Image,Sampler}
- radv: lower discards to demote to workaround a RDR2 game bug

Timothy Arceri (2):

- glsl: fix incorrect optimisation in opt_constant_variable()
- st_glsl_to_nir: fix potential use after free
