Mesa 20.2.3 Release Notes / 2020-11-23
======================================

Mesa 20.2.3 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 20.2.2 release.

Mesa 20.2.3 implements the OpenGL 4.6 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being used.
Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL 4.6. OpenGL
4.6 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each driver.

Mesa 20.2.3 implements the Vulkan 1.2 API, but the version reported by
the apiVersion property of the VkPhysicalDeviceProperties struct
depends on the particular driver being used.

SHA256 checksum
---------------

::

    ae1b240e11531df528d14dc214d2dc4d2b4f2e835c6230ba0b492b171eceb82b  mesa-20.2.3.tar.xz


New features
------------

- None


Bug fixes
---------

- glcpp test 084-unbalanced-parentheses fails with bison 3.6.y
- iris: glClear with FBO imported from DMA-BUF doesn't work
- [spirv-fuzz] Shader causes an assertion failure in nir_opt_large_constants
- Regnum Online UBO break after game update
- Random corruption in KDE with Mesa 20.2 in VMware


Changes
-------

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (1):

- radv: Add ETC2 support on RAVEN2.

Brendan Dougherty (1):

- mesa: Fix vertex_format_to_pipe_format index.

Chad Versace (2):

- anv/image: Check DISJOINT in vkGetPhysicalDeviceImageFormatProperties2 (v2)
- anv/image: Fix isl_surf_usage_flags for stencil images

Christian Gmeiner (1):

- etnaviv: nir: do not run opt loop after nir_lower_bool_xxx(..)

Dave Airlie (1):

- draw: fix tess eval pipeline statistics.

Dylan Baker (6):

- dcs: Add sha256 sums for 20.2.2
- .pick_status.json: Update to bf5cea7232f9ee2934c212211ebefb6fe766526d
- .pick_status.json: Update to 87dc3106b077199b829a082e32ec33d0c6d400ab
- .pick_status.json: Mark 87934f02f9da94f1a493096049c229b973e4785c as backported
- .pick_status.json: Mark ea326912575fad09af59486ad62d126c4ea0ede7 as backported
- .pick_status.json: Update to bac6cc586fe4c1b24351e0574d3a961eb631f6ae

Eric Anholt (3):

- freedreno/cffdec: When .mergedregs is set, don't count half regs.
- util/set: Fix the _mesa_set_clear function to not leave tombstones.
- freedreno: Fix leak of shader binary on disk cache hits.

Erik Faye-Lund (2):

- gallium/util: do not pass undefined sample-count
- mesa/main: add missing include in glformats.h

Gert Wollny (1):

- r600: revert disabling llvm draw

Igor V. Kovalenko (1):

- r600: amend space check for chips older than EVERGREEN

Faith Ekstrand (4):

- mesa/spirv: Lower variable initializers for global variables
- nir: Handle incomplete derefs in split_struct_vars
- nir/opt_intrinsics: Report progress for the gl_SampleMask optimization
- intel/fs: Fix use of undefined value in fixup_nomask_control_flow

Kenneth Graunke (2):

- iris: fix source/destination layers for 3D blits
- intel/fs: Fix sampler message headers on Gen11+ when using scratch

Krunal Patel (2):

- gallium/auxiliary/vl: Odd Dimensions are failing
- radeon/vcn: Bitrate not updated when changing framerate

Louis Li (1):

- radeon/radeon_vce: fix out of target bitrate in CBR mode (H.264)

Marcin Ślusarz (2):

- anv: always annotate memory returned from anv_gem_mmap
- nir: handle float atomics in copy propagation pass

Marek Olšák (3):

- radeonsi: do VGT_FLUSH when switching NGG -> legacy on Sienna Cichlid
- radeonsi: only do VGT_FLUSH for fast launch if previous draw was normal launch
- radeonsi: fix scan_instruction for bindless inc_wrap/dec_wrap atomics

Matt Turner (1):

- glcpp: Handle bison-3.6 error message changes

Michel Dänzer (2):

- i965/bufmgr: Handle NULL bufmgr in brw_bufmgr_get_for_fd
- iris/bufmgr: Handle NULL bufmgr in iris_bufmgr_get_for_fd

Nanley Chery (4):

- iris: Flush dmabufs during context flushes
- mesa: Add and use _mesa_has_depth_float_channel
- mesa: Clamp some depth values in glClearBufferfv
- mesa: Clamp some depth values in glClearBufferfi

Raven (1):

- winsys/svga: fix display corruption after surface_init

Rhys Perry (4):

- radv: fix shader caching with discard->demote workaround
- radv: fix shader caching with NaN fixup workaround
- nir: add nir_alu_src_is_trivial_ssa()
- nir: skip bcsel with non-trivial swizzle in opt_simplify_bcsel_of_phi()

Rob Clark (2):

- freedreno: Protect gmem_cache ralloc allocations
- freedreno/ir3: Fix crash in shader compile fail path

Tapani Pälli (3):

- mesa/st: call memobj_destroy only if there is memory imported
- mesa: do not throw _mesa_problem when invalid enum is used
- egl/dri2: fix race between image create and egl_image_target_texture

Timothy Arceri (1):

- glsl: add extra pp tokens workaround and enable for CoR

Tony Wasserka (1):

- aco/ra: Fix counting of subdword variables in get_reg_create_vector

Vinson Lee (4):

- os: Fix open result check.
- amd/addrlib: Add missing va_end.
- frontends/va: Fix \*num_entrypoints check.
- vdpau: Add missing printf format specifier.

Woody Chow (1):

- st/mesa: Fix EGLImageTargetTexture2D for GL_TEXTURE_2D

Yevhenii Kolesnikov (1):

- nir/large_constants: only search for constant duplicates
