Mesa 20.2.4 Release Notes / 2020-12-04
======================================

Mesa 20.2.4 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 20.2.3 release.

Mesa 20.2.4 implements the OpenGL 4.6 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being used.
Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL 4.6. OpenGL
4.6 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each driver.

Mesa 20.2.4 implements the Vulkan 1.2 API, but the version reported by
the apiVersion property of the VkPhysicalDeviceProperties struct
depends on the particular driver being used.

SHA256 checksum
---------------

::

    0572dc6015d2e1c50f67823edd16855ae9b6feded0a1470598404e75e64aa092  mesa-20.2.4.tar.xz


New features
------------

- None


Bug fixes
---------

- [AMDGPU NAVI 5700xt] Large parts of the Blender viewport does not render correctly if an object with hair is moved.
- zink: regression after !7606


Changes
-------

Christian Gmeiner (1):

- etnaviv/drm: fix evil-twin etna_drm_table_lock

Daniel Stone (1):

- freedreno: Add missing dependency to build

Danylo Piliaiev (1):

- freedreno/a6xx: Fix typo in height alignment calculation in a6xx layout

Dave Airlie (1):

- llvmpipe/setup: move point stats collection earlier.

Dylan Baker (6):

- docs: Add relnotes for 20.2.3
- .pick_status.json: Update to a92f597b98bb032b904c7c8a8c3a9fe798b51915
- .pick_status.json: Update to 89f6b72f19dbc503386643c6283047bdb1013bef
- amd/llvm: run clang-format
- .pick_status.json: Update to 872c4bcd27db7b7ca26abe9fc090ae26d502156f
- pick-ui: don't grab the mouse

Eric Anholt (5):

- freedreno: Fix leak of u_transfer_helper.
- gallium: Fix leak of bound SSBOs at CSO context destruction.
- gallivm: Fix max const buffer count.
- gallium: Fix leak of currently bound UBOs at CSO context destruction.
- freedreno: Break out of "should we free the entry" loop once we've freed.

Eric Engestrom (1):

- gitlab-ci: drop deprecated platforms that snuck in when nobody was watching

Erik Faye-Lund (1):

- zink: fix layered resolves

Ian Romanick (1):

- intel/compiler: Rotate instructions ROR and ROL cannot have source modifiers

James Park (1):

- radv: Fix leak in radv_amdgpu_winsys_destroy()

Krunal Patel (1):

- radeon/vce: Bitrate not updated when changing framerate

Lionel Landwerlin (1):

- anv: fix descriptor pool leak in VMA object

Lucas Stach (1):

- etnaviv: fix disabling of INT filter for real

Marek Olšák (5):

- mesa: call FLUSH_VERTICES before changing sampler uniforms
- ac/nir: fix a typo in ac_are_tessfactors_def_in_all_invocs
- radeonsi: fix a memory leak in si_create_dcc_retile_cs
- radeonsi: fix a nasty bug in si_pm4.c
- radeonsi: disable WGP mode on gfx10.3 to prevent hangs

Pierre-Eric Pelloux-Prayer (1):

- radeonsi/gfx10: flush gfx cs on ngg -> legacy transition

Rhys Perry (7):

- nir/unsigned_upper_bound: fix buffer overflow in search_phi_bcsel
- nir: fix sampler_lod_parameters_pan indices
- aco: don't combine precise max(min()) to med3
- aco: fix combine_constant_comparison_ordering() NaN check with 16/64-bit
- aco: disallow various v_add_u32 opts if modifiers are used
- aco: disable omod if the sign of zeros should be preserved
- aco: fix fp16 \*0.5 omod

Suresh Guttula (2):

- gallium: update abs_delta segementation parameter
- radeon/vcn : Corrected dpb_size calculation for VP9_2

Tapani Pälli (1):

- iris: initialize shared screen->vtbl only once

Timur Kristóf (1):

- aco/optimizer: Only set scc_needed when it is actually needed.
