Mesa 20.2.5 Release Notes / 2020-12-16
======================================

Mesa 20.2.5 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 20.2.4 release.

Mesa 20.2.5 implements the OpenGL 4.6 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being used.
Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL 4.6. OpenGL
4.6 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each driver.

Mesa 20.2.5 implements the Vulkan 1.2 API, but the version reported by
the apiVersion property of the VkPhysicalDeviceProperties struct
depends on the particular driver being used.

SHA256 checksum
---------------

::

    0ebec6a22660d83f5ed437a145dc703c9398cd1376143aef273ea85f9dc5dd98  mesa-20.2.5.tar.xz


New features
------------

- None


Bug fixes
---------

- Mesa 20.3.0 and older ATi/Radeon cards fails
- Amber test NIR validation failed after spirv_to_nir
- Amber test validate_phi_src
- [RADV] broken stencil behaviour when using extended dynamic stencil state
- [RADV] Some bindings seem broken with VK_DYNAMIC_STATE_VERTEX_INPUT_BINDING_STRIDE_EXT
- ci: Missing needs: in radeonsi-stoney-\*?
- Triangles appear from the center of the field on PES2021 with Mesa 20.2.x
- [gen9][iris][regression][bisected] flaky piglit tests
- [Intel][OpenGL] Fail to get correct value when sampling from a texture in depth formats.
- Storing pointer to temporary value inside the Iris driver.


Changes
-------

Andrii Simiklit (1):

- iris: update depth value for stages after fast clear depth

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (5):

- radv: Fix a hang on CB change by adding flushes.
- radv: Deal with unused attachments in mip flush
- radv: Skip tiny non-visible VRAM heap.
- radv: Fix budget calculations with large BAR.
- radv: Fix exporting/importing multisample images.

Boris Brezillon (1):

- panfrost: Make sure we always add a reader -> write dependency when needed

Daniel Schürmann (2):

- aco/ra: use get_reg_specified() for p_extract_vector
- aco: fix DCE of rematerializable phi operands

Danylo Piliaiev (1):

- nir/lower_returns: Append missing phis' sources after "break" insertion

Dave Airlie (1):

- radeonsi: fix regression on gpus using the radeon winsys.

Dylan Baker (8):

- relnotes: Add sha256sums for 20.2.4
- .pick_status.json: Update to ec3828add38a83b8c09fd5896265abc9d766162e
- .pick_status.json: Update to f93b7d14d66d8ba70d44772d1a1b6696310b7d17
- .pick_status.json: Update to 3f0da800eb4b8184c24707c52d5a519abe948898
- .pick_status.json: Update to cf3fc79cd0ab55776bbbabe76237c272ab07133e
- .pick_status.json: Update to 84c8a35aa2ca4d4de66192933735094ed07b4aaa
- .pick_status.json: Update to a7fb3954a1318a6b27e1405a9e799dd8f06eaa34
- .pick_status.json: Update to ada9be1ec9e14fc045086411fbf2d3cb0efbbe2f

Eric Anholt (1):

- softpipe: Fix swizzled texture gather of int textures.

Erik Faye-Lund (1):

- gallium: do not reset buffers for unsupported stages

Jonathan Gray (1):

- aco: use UINT64_C on 64 bit constant arguments

Marcin Ślusarz (1):

- iris: store copy of the border color in the border color hash table

Marek Olšák (4):

- radeonsi: determine correctly if switching from normal launch to fast launch
- ac: fix detection of Pro graphics
- ac: fix min/max_good_num_cu_per_sa on gfx10.3 with disabled SEs
- radeonsi: disable SDMA on gfx6-7 and gfx10.3 to decrease CPU overhead

Mauro Rossi (1):

- android: spirv: fix '::' typo in gen rules

Michel Dänzer (2):

- ci: .lava-test:amd64 template needs arm_build
- ac: Don't negate strstr return values in ac_query_gpu_info

Mike Blumenkrantz (3):

- zink: fix direct image mapping offset
- zink: really fix direct image mapping offset (I mean it this time)
- st/pbo: fix pbo uploads without PIPE_CAP_TGSI_VS_LAYER_VIEWPORT

Nanley Chery (1):

- iris: Fix resource ptr in resolve_sampler_views

Rhys Perry (2):

- aco: don't assume src=lower when splitting self-intersecting copies
- spirv: fix GLSLstd450Modf/GLSLstd450Frexp when the destination is vector

Robin Ole Heinemann (1):

- anv: Add DRM_RDWR flag in anv_gem_handle_to_fd

Samuel Pitoiset (11):

- radv: mark GFX10.3 as a non-conformant Vulkan implementation
- radv: fix exporting multiviews with NGG
- radv: disable alphaToOne feature
- radv: fix ignoring the vertex attribute stride if set as dynamic
- radv: fix optimizing needed states if some are marked as dynamic
- radv: do VGT_FLUSH when switching NGG -> legacy on Sienna Cichlid
- radv: fix applying the NGG minimum vertex count requirement
- radv: don't count unusable vertices to the NGG LDS size
- aco: fix combining max(-min(a, b), c) if a or b uses the neg modifier
- radv: ignore other blend targets if dual-source blending is enabled
- radv: disable SQTT support for unsupported GPUs

Simon Ser (1):

- radv: fix access to uninitialized radeon_bo_metadata

Tapani Pälli (1):

- anv: fix calculation of buffer size in case dynamic size is used

Timur Kristóf (1):

- aco: Use program->num_waves as maximum in scheduler.

Vinson Lee (1):

- meson: Fix Clang microsoft-enum-value detection.

Witold Baryluk (1):

- zink: Cap PIPE_SHADER_CAP_MAX_CONST_BUFFERS to 32

cheyang (1):

- android: fix build failure with libbacktrace

yshi18 (1):

- iris: fix memleak for query_buffer_uploader
