Mesa 20.3.2 Release Notes / 2020-12-30
======================================

Mesa 20.3.2 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 20.3.1 release.

Mesa 20.3.2 implements the OpenGL 4.6 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being used.
Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL 4.6. OpenGL
4.6 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each driver.

Mesa 20.3.2 implements the Vulkan 1.2 API, but the version reported by
the apiVersion property of the VkPhysicalDeviceProperties struct
depends on the particular driver being used.

SHA256 checksum
---------------

::

    cce001b685d23afb976b04138714906abcf7e7f996da6355e6a43e5ca486533d  mesa-20.3.2.tar.xz


New features
------------

- None


Bug fixes
---------

- \`gl_FragColor' undeclared (AMDGPU) - tested stable Mesa 20.1 and latest git for 20.3 (Game/Wine/Proton)
- Mesa considers the framebuffer with mixed 3D and 2D array attachments to be incomplete.
- Multiple buffer definitions bound to single OpDecorate::Binding break SPIR-V module.
- Intel driver segfaults on SPIR-V with OpArrayLength


Changes
-------

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (1):

- radv: Don't skip layout transitions that only differ in render loop.

Caio Marcelo de Oliveira Filho (3):

- spirv: Implement OpArrayLength for OpenGL
- nir: Consider pointer initializers in nir_remove_dead_variables
- spirv: Remove more dead variables

Daniel Schürmann (4):

- aco: fix DCE of rematerializable phi operands
- aco/spill: only prevent rematerializable vars from being DCE'd if they haven't been renamed
- aco/ra: fix phi operand renaming
- nir/opt_if: split ALU from Phi more aggressively

Danylo Piliaiev (4):

- tu: Ignore pTessellationState if there is no tesselation shaders
- tu: pCounterBuffers can be NULL in vkCmd*TransformFeedbackEXT()
- freedreno/a6xx: Fix assert which checks the count of shader outputs
- ir3: Allow tesselation to use all 32 varying slots

Dylan Baker (11):

- docs: Add sha256 sums for 20.3.1
- .pick_status.json: Update to 2d78e28ba702d366becabb8e241b861e6711c76e
- .pick_status.json: Update to 661922f6ac9576fc2077c5d50b53ef7edf9e8a18
- .pick_status.json: Update to f65750d2215242b17309b5aa8845b717bb913e77
- .pick_status.json: Update to b9fccafed616aa2906dad3c77dca0c67af5017b8
- .pick_status.json: Mark f65750d2215242b17309b5aa8845b717bb913e77 as backported
- .pick_status.json: Update to 8db0775f4520e08b3c539f9bd2d1f567639c088c
- .pick_status.json: Update to a22b85ce5e825275533ca1be9fbd47667e991356
- .pick_status.json: Update to 9ef23e428bd18c412499471b4e3550a489b72c3f
- .pick_status.json: Mark 967ae12931e0dc12855de903851222b2f0607878 as denominated
- .pick_status.json: Update to 6c8cc9be12dc5d6c0d2386d6addb69d8f2fb5399

Eric Anholt (5):

- mesa/st: Finalize the texture before BlitFramebuffer from it.
- freedreno/a6xx: Flush depth at the end of bypass rendering, too.
- softpipe: count CS invocations for pipeline stats queries.
- mesa/st: Update FP state when textures change with an ATI_fs bound.
- ci/deqp: Fix inverted meaning of DEQP_NO_SAVE_RESULTS.

Erik Faye-Lund (2):

- zink: fix 8 bit index handling code
- zink: fix format-mapping

Hyunjun Ko (1):

- turnip: use ir3_compiler_destroy instead of ralloc_free

Icecream95 (1):

- panfrost: Fix panfrost_small_padded_vertex_count for 17 vertices

Marek Olšák (1):

- radeonsi: fix small primitive culling with MSAA force-disabled and smoothing

Mike Blumenkrantz (3):

- st/mesa: set drawpixels swizzle before creating sampler view
- zink: handle null ubos
- st/pbo: fix pbo uploads without PIPE_CAP_TGSI_VS_LAYER_VIEWPORT and skip gs

Pierre-Eric Pelloux-Prayer (1):

- egl: fix EGL_EXT_protected_content/surface mixup

Rhys Perry (1):

- aco: add block to worklist in mark_block_wqm()

Ruijing Dong (1):

- radeon/vcn: fix hevc 10bit profile error

Ryan Neph (1):

- virgl: fix BGRA emulation artifacts during window resize

Samuel Pitoiset (1):

- radv: add missing DB flush after depth/stencil resolve operations

Tapani Pälli (1):

- mesa: fix layered framebuffer attachment target check

Timothy Arceri (1):

- glsl: default to compat shaders in compat profile
