Mesa 21.1.7 Release Notes / 2021-08-11
======================================

Mesa 21.1.7 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 21.1.6 release.

Mesa 21.1.7 implements the OpenGL 4.6 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being used.
Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL 4.6. OpenGL
4.6 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each driver.

Mesa 21.1.7 implements the Vulkan 1.2 API, but the version reported by
the apiVersion property of the VkPhysicalDeviceProperties struct
depends on the particular driver being used.

SHA256 checksum
---------------

::

    e9e67c10654f2e4bf15b944bb048007a614292aa4792b1b7512eb700b7b3a7bb  mesa-21.1.7.tar.xz


New features
------------

- None


Bug fixes
---------

- Miscompilation of a switch case
- [radeonsi][regression] CPU is being used ~10 times more than usual after c5478f9067f.
- dEQP-VK.wsi.android.swapchain.create#image_swapchain_create_info crash on Android R
- The image is distorted while use iGPU(Intel GPU) rendering and output via dGPU (AMD GPU)
- lima: regression in plbu scissors cmd
- Incorrect rendering


Changes
-------

Alyssa Rosenzweig (3):

- pan/bi: Restrict swizzles on same cycle temporaries
- nir/lower_mediump_io: Don't remap base unless needed
- nir/lower_mediump: Fix metadata in all passes

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (9):

- util/fossilize_db: Update parsed_offset correctly.
- util/fossilize_db: Reset file position to parsed_offset on cache_offset read failure.
- util/fossilize_db: Flush files after header write.
- util/fossilize_db: Be conservative about header length check for locking.
- util/fossilize_db: Only allocate entries after full read.
- util/fossilize_db: Use uint64_t for file size.
- util/fossilize_db: Unlock the cache file if the entry already exists.
- util/fossilize_db: Add extra flock mutex.
- radv: Allocate space for inline push constants.

Chia-I Wu (1):

- vulkan/wsi/x11: do not inherit last_present_mode

Connor Abbott (1):

- ir3: Preserve gl_ViewportIndex in the binning shader

Dave Airlie (3):

- teximage: return correct desktop GL error for compressedteximage
- intel/fs: restrict max push length on older GPUs to a smaller amount
- virgl: disable anisotropic filtering.

Dylan Baker (1):

- freedreno/ir3: Add build id to the disassembler test

Eric Engestrom (9):

- .pick_status.json: Update to 7055282231cdad23e7b23fb49a2f953a99797f8a
- .pick_status.json: Update to 2f06642b06c94f07f4bfe3df32b25659428c9144
- .pick_status.json: Mark 6ccf11ac2b951963407601b5b1109b45a972e48e as denominated
- .pick_status.json: Update to 2f06642b06c94f07f4bfe3df32b25659428c9144
- .pick_status.json: Update to 353e6323936b812884fa677c25bdba91554881b7
- .pick_status.json: Update to 4128acdee32eadfef1fb8c3c3ce2e512a267cdf4
- pick-ui: drop assert that optional argument is passed
- pick-ui: show nomination type in the UI
- pick-ui: show commit date

Erico Nunes (1):

- lima: avoid crash with negative viewport values

Hoe Hao Cheng (1):

- zink: make codegen compatible with python 3.5

Jesse Natalie (1):

- mesa/main: Check for fbo attachments when importing EGL images to textures

Joshua Watt (1):

- v3d, vc4: Fix dmabuf import for non-scanout buffers

Juan A. Suarez Romero (1):

- gallium/hud: initialize query

Karol Herbst (1):

- nv30: fix emulated vertex index buffers

Lepton Wu (1):

- gallium: Reset {d,r}Priv in dri_unbind_context

Lionel Landwerlin (3):

- loader/dri3: create linear buffer with scanout support
- anv: fix submission batching with perf queries
- anv: don't try to access Android swapchains

Lucas Stach (2):

- renderonly: don't complain when GPU import fails
- etnaviv: always try to create KMS side handles for imported resources

Marcin Ślusarz (1):

- glsl: evaluate switch expression once

Mike Blumenkrantz (1):

- zink: use array size in spirv bo length calculations

Philipp Zabel (1):

- etnaviv: fix gbm_bo_get_handle_for_plane for multiplanar images

Pierre Moreau (2):

- clover/spirv: Properly size 3-component vector args
- clover/nir: Set constant buffer pointer size to host

Pierre-Eric Pelloux-Prayer (3):

- gallium/va: don't use key=NULL in hash tables
- amd/registers: fix fields conflict detection
- radeonsi: don't create an infinite number of variants

Rhys Perry (1):

- nir/algebraic: fix imod by negative power-of-two

Samuel Pitoiset (1):

- radv: fix selecting the first active CU when profiling with SQTT

Simon Ser (5):

- etnaviv: fix renderonly check in etna_resource_alloc
- etnaviv: fail in get_handle(TYPE_KMS) without a scanout resource
- freedreno: fail in get_handle(TYPE_KMS) without a scanout resource
- panfrost: fail in get_handle(TYPE_KMS) without a scanout resource
- lima: fail in get_handle(TYPE_KMS) without a scanout resource

Thomas H.P. Andersen (1):

- nine: Fix assert in tx_src_param

Timothy Arceri (1):

- intel/compiler: make sure swizzle is applied to if condition

Yevhenii Kolesnikov (2):

- glsl: Add operator for .length() method on implicitly-sized arrays
- glsl: Properly handle .length() of an unsized array

Zhu Yuliang (1):

- gallium/vl: don't leak fd in vl_dri3_screen_create
