Mesa 21.2.4 Release Notes / 2021-10-14
======================================

Mesa 21.2.4 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 21.2.3 release.

Mesa 21.2.4 implements the OpenGL 4.6 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being used.
Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL 4.6. OpenGL
4.6 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each driver.

Mesa 21.2.4 implements the Vulkan 1.2 API, but the version reported by
the apiVersion property of the VkPhysicalDeviceProperties struct
depends on the particular driver being used.

SHA256 checksum
---------------

::

   fe6ede82d1ac02339da3c2ec1820a379641902fd351a52cc01153f76eff85b44  mesa-21.2.4.tar.xz


New features
------------

- None


Bug fixes
---------

- RADV: Rendering issues in Resident Evil 2 with NGGC
- crocus:  Incorrect stride when used through prime
- anv: descriptorBindingUniformBufferUpdateAfterBind feature is not supported


Changes
-------

Alyssa Rosenzweig (3):

- panfrost: Move special_varying to compiler definitions
- panfrost: Fix off-by-one in varying count assert
- panfrost: Don't set CAP_TGSI_FS_COORD_PIXEL_CENTER_INTEGER

Bas Nieuwenhuizen (2):

- amd/common: Add fallback for misreported clocks for RGP.
- radv: Handle copying zero queries.

Chia-I Wu (1):

- radv: plug leaks in radv_device_init_accel_struct_build_state

Connor Abbott (1):

- ir3: Use source in ir3_output_conv_src_type()

Dave Airlie (7):

- crocus/query: don't loop on ready status after gpu hang.
- device_select: close dri3 fd after using it.
- crocus: Honor scanout requirement from DRI
- crocus/gen5: reemit shaders on gen5 after new program cache bo.
- crocus/gen5: add dirty flags for urb fences.
- crocus/gen6: don't reemit the svbi when debugging
- gallivm/format: clamp SINT conversion rather than truncate.

Dylan Baker (7):

- docs" Add SHA256 sum for mesa 21.2.3
- .pick_status.json: Update to fb8f532ea1bbd9c959e0f59c652347e435a71f91
- .pick_status.json: Update to d2543658ef6fe0ad59af217a09a931d3b6174a43
- .pick_status.json: Update to 729991e09cd28550001ae63710ab929d95b115bc
- .pick_status.json: Update to 3a18963b0876af2aa0d60dd9917e69d409ce4d6e
- .pick_status.json: Update to ced950e42f4a95ef410e63c2d26a2119e0c3c40b
- .pick_status.json: Update to 783f8f728ce8e77885adbc7b2c12c39c3e3e5198

Emma Anholt (2):

- gallium/dri: Make YUV formats we're going to emulate external-only.
- i915g: Check for the scanout-layout conditions before setting level info.

Filip Gawin (1):

- r300: implement forgotten tgsi's cases of textures

Gert Wollny (1):

- mesa: signal driver when buffer is bound to different texture format

Icecream95 (1):

- pan/mdg: Use the correct swizzle for condition moves

Faith Ekstrand (1):

- vulkan/shader_module: Fix the lifetime of temporary shader modules

Kai Wasserbäch (2):

- gallivm: add new wrapper around Module::setOverrideStackAlignment()
- gallivm: fix FTBFS on i386 with LLVM >= 13, StackAlignmentOverride is gone

Lionel Landwerlin (3):

- anv: enable UBO indexing
- anv: add missing transition handling bits
- spirv: deal with null pointers

Marek Olšák (2):

- radeonsi: add back a workaround for DCC MSAA on gfx9 due to conformance issues
- ac/surface: don't overwrite DCC settings for imported buffers

Pavel Asyutchenko (1):

- llvmpipe: fix crash when doing FB fetch + gl_FragDepth write in one shader

Qiang Yu (1):

- loader/dri3: fix swap out of order when changing swap interval

Rob Clark (1):

- freedreno/drm: Move pipe unref after fence removal

Samuel Pitoiset (2):

- radv: fix adjusting the frag coord when RADV_FORCE_VRS is enabled
- aco: fix load_barycentric_at_{offset,sample}

Timur Kristóf (3):

- aco: Fix small primitive precision.
- aco: Fix determining whether any culling is enabled.
- ac/nir/cull: Accept NaN and +/- Inf in face culling.

Vasily Khoruzhick (1):

- lima: split_load_input: don't split unaligned vec2

Vinson Lee (1):

- pps: Avoid duplicate elements in with_datasources array.
