Mesa 22.0.2 Release Notes / 2022-04-21
======================================

Mesa 22.0.2 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 22.0.1 release.

Mesa 22.0.2 implements the OpenGL 4.6 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being used.
Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL 4.6. OpenGL
4.6 is **only** available if requested at context creation.
Compatibility contexts may report a lower version depending on each driver.

Mesa 22.0.2 implements the Vulkan 1.2 API, but the version reported by
the apiVersion property of the VkPhysicalDeviceProperties struct
depends on the particular driver being used.

SHA256 checksum
---------------

::

   df4fa560dcce6680133067cd15b0505fc424ca703244ce9ab247c74d2fab6885  mesa-22.0.2.tar.xz


New features
------------

- None


Bug fixes
---------

- Vulkan::Calling vkWaitForFences Timeout
- Intel (CHT) - Uplink text rendering bugged out in Mesa 22.0
- gen9atom gpu hang on dEQP-VK.spirv_assembly.instruction.graphics.float16.arithmetic_1
- bad memory managment on panfrost RK3399 -  cannot alocate more ram - fury unleashed
- [Intel, Iris] Broken rendering in Ryujinx on Tigerlake
- intel: integer_mad_hi / integer_mad_sat / integer_mul_hi produce invalid results
- Textures colors distortion in "Black Geyser: Couriers of Darkness" with radeonsi
- ShaderStorageBlocksWriteAccess not set for spir-v shaders?
- radeonsi dEQP-GLES3.functional.buffer.map.write.explicit_flush.* flake crashes
- radv: nir validation error with invalid array access
- Intel Iris Xe Geometry Flickering/Assets Disappearing
- Rendering artifacts when playing Outer Wilds [Reproducible with latest ANV driver built from main]
- Vulkan wsi leaks vk_sync object on every wsi_AcquireNextImageKHR call
- [bisected] panfrost(RK3399/T860): Emulationstation: broken, black or missing menus with v22.0.0
- Plasma/KDE settings menus disappear on daily build
- Square Artifacts Dragons Dogma
- r300: Anmesia the dark descent corruption
- Error compiling with LLVM-git/15


Changes
-------

Alexey Bozhenko (1):

- spirv: fix OpBranchConditional when both branches are the same

Alyssa Rosenzweig (1):

- panfrost: Process scissor state earlier

Benjamin Cheng (1):

- vulkan/queue: Destroy wait temps if they are skipped

Boris Brezillon (1):

- lavapipe: Don't use VK_OUTARRAY_MAKE()/vk_outarray_append()

Caio Oliveira (2):

- intel/fs: Initialize the sample mask in flags register when using demote
- intel/fs: Fix IsHelperInvocation for the case no discard/demote are used

Cristian Ciocaltea (1):

- ci: Avoid altering EXTRA_CARGO_ARGS environment variable

Daniel Schürmann (1):

- aco/optimizer: fix call to can_use_opsel() in apply_insert()

Danylo Piliaiev (3):

- turnip: Fix the lack of WFM before indirect draws
- turnip: enable has_ccu_flush_bug workaround for a660
- turnip: Correctly store separate stencil in gmem store

Dave Airlie (6):

- radv: use flush vgt streamout like PAL does.
- gallivm/sample: detect if rho is inf or nan and flush to zero.
- llvmpipe: fix nr_sampler_view in key creation.
- draw: handle tess eval shader when getting num outputs
- u_blitter/stencil: take dstbox x/y into accounts for dst fb width
- util/stencil: fix stencil fallback blit shader texture types.

Dylan Baker (20):

- docs: add sah256 sum for mesa 22.0.1
- .pick_status.json: Update to 5a459b8f6b0b59814865bc5869a868269f8f7ebf
- pick/core: have update_commits return the commit list
- bin/auto-pick: Add a script that automates applying commits
- .pick_status.json: Mark 3ef093f697ad9027ba514c7a4a6a10b7bd95bd47 as denominated
- core: don't pass the ui back into commit.apply
- .pick_status.json: Update to 33c800bf913771ddadb5bd632df46582f4d1c9f3
- .pick_status.json: Update to 837f781c9a4f909ac1ee0b3b8331af87301b5fc3
- .pick_status.json: Update to 7478b00c7cc7f7ec8cbe224ce600362f7fdb9411
- .pick_status.json: Update to c7eaf0306876df53d3608ae3bf67afc272dcdf20
- .pick_status.json: Mark 94706601fa2f52605d6e488f30fad9a0e2440612 as denominated
- .pick_status.json: Mark 174d086e8c818db4522731e845bd259e2baa8830 as denominated
- .pick_status.json: Mark 8b71118aa066ab125b7440912ed1e14da79c9451 as backported
- .pick_status.json: Mark 4e30da7874e6586c7ac94cd34560c782d0f9678d as backported
- .pick_status.json: Mark 7da211e24fe14d8b107461bdfcb3b8d67212f88a as backported
- .pick_status.json: Mark 8294d454245d4318befac7c8915e55db3d47cefd as backported
- .pick_status.json: Update to e509598470c000498c3e1328e012142d9047e292
- .pick_status.json: Mark 2b688942c1b1f5ca4f3e4d33231579149aeb8fdb as denominated
- .pick_status.json: Mark dd783d7144932d79ef761810d46e45c3df7148cf as denominated
- .pick_status.json: Update to 9f44a264623461c98368185b023d99446676e039

Emma Anholt (13):

- r600: Update the PS state before checking for cb_misc update.
- r600: Fix ordering of SSBO loads versus texturing.
- r600: Add a workaround and explanation for shadowcubearray TG4.
- vulkan: Make sure we've loaded our connectors when querying plane props.
- st/glsl-to-tgsi: Fix handling of csel(bool, vec, vec).
- r600: Disable SB in the presence of indirection on temp arrays.
- r600: Disable SB when INTERP_SAMPLE is used.
- r600: Implement memoryBarrier() in the non-SFN path.
- nir_to_tgsi: Fix emitting the sample number for non-array MSAA image access.
- nir_to_tgsi: Fix the address reg mapping for images and SSBOs to match G-T-T.
- turnip: Stop allocating unused pvtmem space in the pipeline CS.
- nir: Add lowering for fround_even on r300.
- nouveau/nir: Fix the inverted sense of usesSampleMaskIn.

Erik Faye-Lund (3):

- vbo/dlist: do not try to pad an empty draw
- d3d12: fix return-code without dxcompiler.dll
- vulkan: explicitly cast object-type enum

Francisco Jerez (1):

- intel/perf: Fix OA report accumulation on Gfx12+.

Georg Lehmann (7):

- nir/fold_16bit_sampler_conversions: Don't fold dest upcasts.
- radv: Add a vkCmdBuildAccelerationStructuresIndirectKHR stub.
- radv: Add more RT pipeline stubs.
- radv: Don't hash ycbcr sampler base object.
- nir/fold_16bit_sampler_conversions: Fix dest type mismatches.
- nir/fold_16bit_sampler_conversions: Fix src type mismatches.
- radv: Enable global bo list if 1.2 features are used.

Ian Romanick (3):

- intel/compiler: Fix sample_d messages on DG2
- intel/fs: Force destination types on DP4A instructions
- nir: intel/compiler: Lower TXD on array surfaces on DG2+

Icecream95 (1):

- panfrost: Stop overallocating compressed textures

Faith Ekstrand (7):

- v3dv/queue: Rework multisync_free
- nir: Dont set coord_components on txs
- lavapipe: Use VK_OUTARRAY for GetPhysicalDeviceQueueFamilyProperties[2]
- anv: Disallow blending on swizzled formats
- nir/lower_int64: Fix [iu]mul_high handling
- iris: Don't leak scratch BOs
- nir/opcodes: fisfinite32 should return bool32

Jordan Justen (1):

- intel/dev: Add device info for RPL-P

Kai Wasserbäch (2):

- fix(FTBFS): clover: work around removal of PointerType::getElementType()
- fix(clover): FTBFS: Added missing include for ConstantInt for LLVM 15

Kenneth Graunke (2):

- intel/compiler: Call inst->resize_sources before setting the sources
- iris: Add pre-draw flushing for stream output targets

Lionel Landwerlin (9):

- anv: fix variable shadowing
- anv: zero-out anv_batch_bo
- anv: implement EXT_tooling_info
- iris: don't synchronize BO for batch decoding
- anv: disable preemption on 3DPRIMITIVE on gfx12
- anv: fix dynamic sample locations on Gen7/7.5
- blorp: disable depth bounds
- intel: fix URB programming for GT1s
- anv: allow getting the address of the beginning of the batch

Marcin Ślusarz (3):

- anv: fix push constant lowering for task/mesh
- anv: invalidate all metadata in anv_nir_lower_ubo_loads
- intel/compiler: invalidate all metadata in brw_nir_lower_intersection_shader

Michael Olbrich (1):

- crocus: export GEM handle with RDWR access rights

Mike Blumenkrantz (29):

- draw: fix gs vertex stream counting
- radv: fix CmdSetColorWriteEnableEXT(attachmentCount==MAX_RTS)
- draw: fix nonzero stream primitives generated queries
- lavapipe: enforce monotonic timeline incrementing
- zink: force push descriptors cache update if hashing detects changes
- llvmpipe: handle sampling from 2d views of 3d images
- zink: unset resource layout+access when doing storage setup
- zink: adds refs to user index buffers when tc is not active
- zink: handle 0 ubos and 0 ssbos in pipeline layout
- zink: create pipeline layout if only bindless descriptor set is used
- zink: fix xfb analysis variable finding for arrays
- zink: track internal conditional render state
- zink: flag sample locations for re-set on batch flush
- lavapipe: fix typo in set_event execution
- mesa/st: add special casing for pointsize constant updating during validate
- intel/isl: fix 2d view of 3d textures
- zink: fix max geometry input component advertising
- nir/lower_tex: avoid adding invalid LOD to RECT textures
- zink: use the calculated last struct member idx for ssbo size in ntv
- zink: avoid creating ssbo variable types with multiple runtime arrays
- nir/lower_tex: fix rect queries with lower_rect set
- mesa/st: set normalized coords for RECT samplers if rects are unsupported
- zink: reject resource creation if format features don't match attachment
- zink: unconditionally set line width on rasterizer state change
- zink: support restart with PIPE_PRIM_LINES_ADJACENCY if ext is available
- zink: handle device-local unsynchronized maps
- util/draw: fix map size of indirect buffer in util_draw_indirect_read
- util/draw: handle draw_count=0 when reading indirect parameters
- util/draw: fix indirect draw count readback

Pavel Ondračka (1):

- r300: respect output_semantic_index when writing colors

Pierre-Eric Pelloux-Prayer (6):

- glsl/nir/linker: update shader_storage_blocks_write_access for SPIR-V
- gallium/u_threaded: late alloc cpu_storage
- gallium/tc: warn if an app is incompatible with cpu_storage
- gallium/tc: zero alloc transfers
- glsl/nir/linker: fix shader_storage_blocks_write_access
- drirc: enable radeonsi_zerovram for Black Geyser

Qiang Yu (1):

- nir/linker: disable varying from uniform lowering by default

Rohan Garg (1):

- iris: set a default EDSC flag

Samuel Pitoiset (8):

- radv,drirc: move RADV workarounds to 00-radv-defaults.conf
- radv: disable DCC for Fable Anniversary, Dragons Dogma, GTA IV and more
- radv: enable radv_disable_aniso_single_level for DXVK/vkd3d
- radv: fix cleaning the image view for CmdCopyImageToBuffer()
- radv: save/restore the stencil write mask during internal driver operations
- radv: suspend/resume queries during internal driver operations
- radv: save/restore the stencil reference during internal driver operations
- radv: fix initializing pipeline_key::topology for GFX9 and older

Sviatoslav Peleshko (1):

- mesa: flush bitmap caches when changing scissors or window rects state

Timothy Arceri (1):

- glsl: fix needs_lowering() call in varying packing pass

Timur Kristóf (4):

- aco: Fix VOP2 instruction format in visit_tex.
- nir: Handle out of bounds access in nir_vectorize_tess_levels.
- radv: Fix gs_vgpr_comp_cnt for NGG VS without passthrough mode.
- radv: Use correct buffer offset for conditional rendering.
