Mesa 6.5 Release Notes / March 31, 2006
=======================================

Mesa 6.5 is a new development release.

MD5 checksums
-------------

::

   657be3b92f6dabc78a67ed9cb8d67813  MesaLib-6.5.tar.gz
   61beda590bfc5b4a12e979d5f2d70d7a  MesaLib-6.5.tar.bz2
   19d48b872d579d4f91466060804a59ac  MesaLib-6.5.zip
   694ad3a7007010c7418a9c72d1cba5b7  MesaDemos-6.5.tar.gz
   ab95b590dcd640726a2d89e62068c66e  MesaDemos-6.5.tar.bz2
   b792c303fefd87294488e2b7eab976e5  MesaDemos-6.5.zip
   ac1d585483617db0c91e5c15cb5ec3a3  MesaGLUT-6.5.tar.gz
   59f0bf2b2ffb67fe23ee479f9b044f31  MesaGLUT-6.5.tar.bz2
   005decb2136718e22222ac1c4805cd15  MesaGLUT-6.5.zip

New Features
------------

-  OpenGL Shading language support

   This includes the GL_ARB_shader_objects, GL_ARB_shading_language_100,
   GL_ARB_vertex_shader and GL_ARB_fragment_shader extensions. Most of
   the work was done by Michal Krol. There's probably a fair number of
   bugs since this is a pretty large, complicated body of code.

   The OpenGL 2.0 interface to these features will be implemented in a
   future version of Mesa,

-  GL_EXT_timer_query

   Used to measure the time of OpenGL operations at high precision. Only
   supported in the software/Xlib driver at this time.

-  GL_EXT_packed_depth_stencil

   Defines a new GL_DEPTH_STENCIL_EXT pixel format.

-  GL_EXT_framebuffer_blit

   A simplified glCopyPixels-like feature for copying pixel rectangles.

-  GL_ARB_half_float_pixel

   Adds a new half-precision floating point format for image transfers,
   such as for glDrawPixels, glReadPixels, glTexImage, etc.

Changes
-------

-  removed GL_HP_occlusion_test (use GL_ARB_occlusion_query instead)
-  removed GL_SGIX/SGIS_pixel_texture extensions

Bug fixes
---------

-  fixed glxcontextmodes.c datatype problem (bug 5835)
-  fixed aix-gcc build/install bugs (bug 5874)
-  fixed some bugs in texture env program generation
-  glXCopyContext() didn't handle texture object bindings properly
-  glXCopyContext() didn't copy all lighting state
-  fixed FreeBSD config (Pedro Giffuni)
-  fixed some minor framebuffer object bugs
-  replaced dprintf() with \_glu_printf() in GLU (bug 6244)
-  fixed a number of thread safety bugs/regressions
-  fixed a number of GLU tesselator bugs (John Shell, bug 6339)
-  paletted texturing was broken w/ floating point palettes (K. Schultz)
-  lots of assorted framebuffer object bug fixes

Known Issues
------------

-  Rendering to depth textures will not work. Rendering to
   GL_DEPTH_STENCIL textures should work.

Driver Interface Changes
------------------------

-  Stencil: The Driver.StencilOp/Func/Mask() functions have been
   replaced by the two-sided versions: Driver.Stencil*Separate().
-  Render-to-texture: The functions for rendering to textures have
   changed.

To Do (someday) items
---------------------

-  Switch to freeglut
-  Increase MAX_DRAWBUFFERS
-  Fix linux-glide target/driver.
-  Fix lambda calculation for frag progs.

Driver Status
-------------

::

   Driver         Status
   ----------------------  ----------------------
   DRI drivers     varies with the driver
   XMesa/GLX (on Xlib) implements OpenGL 1.5
   OSMesa (off-screen) implements OpenGL 1.5
   Glide (3dfx Voodoo1/2)  implements OpenGL 1.3
   SVGA            implements OpenGL 1.3
   Wind River UGL      implements OpenGL 1.3
   Windows/Win32       implements OpenGL 1.5
   DJGPP           implements OpenGL 1.5
   GGI         implements OpenGL 1.3
   BeOS            implements OpenGL 1.5
   Allegro         needs updating
   D3D         needs updating
