Mesa 6.5.3 Release Notes / April 27, 2007
=========================================

Mesa 6.5.3 is a development release with many changes and new features.
Mesa 7.0 is expected to follow shortly.

MD5 checksums
-------------

::

   39f33ea64e34e2d5b20640b008b57649  MesaLib-6.5.3.tar.gz
   46359457147c469745f24b5074a186f0  MesaLib-6.5.3.tar.bz2
   a8946fa861634ce15971396f47992c41  MesaLib-6.5.3.zip
   08e26948d57eaca74d02a530b2d8106e  MesaDemos-6.5.3.tar.gz
   8af91773ab2653fe537499676b05f2e8  MesaDemos-6.5.3.tar.bz2
   783f81b171bf89b0929abc894efd25a6  MesaDemos-6.5.3.zip
   9467d415388fe1ad82991fb20704b812  MesaGLUT-6.5.3.tar.gz
   360843e46b7ebb6909290b023f9b26fa  MesaGLUT-6.5.3.tar.bz2
   7686065e5c15a30de08a1610860b6840  MesaGLUT-6.5.3.zip

Shared library numbering
------------------------

Mesa 6.5.3 supports the OpenGL 2.0/2.1 API. However, the (unix) shared
library version is still 1.5 (i.e. libGL.so.1.5.xxxxxx). Bumping the
shared library version to 2.x would cause linking problems with existing
OpenGL applications. Since OpenGL 2.x is backward compatible with OpenGL
1.x the shared library version number doesn't have to be incremented
(which would indicate an incompatible ABI).

Other OpenGL vendors name their OpenGL 2.x libraries libGL.so.1.0.xxxxx
for the same reason.

New features
------------

-  OpenGL 2.0 and 2.1 API support.
-  Entirely new Shading Language code generator. See the :doc:`Shading
   Language <../shading>` page for more information.
-  Much faster software execution of vertex, fragment shaders.
-  New vertex buffer object (vbo) infrastructure
-  Updated glext.h file (version 39)
-  Updated glxext.h file (version 19)
-  GL_MAX_DRAWBUFFERS is now 4 (software rendering) so "multiple render
   targets" are really supported.

Bug fixes
---------

-  Fog was errantly applied when a fragment shader was enabled (bug
   9346)
-  glPush/PopClientAttrib didn't handle VBO bindings correctly (bug
   9445)
-  With 32-bit Z buffer, the fragment Z of lines and points was
   sometimes wrong.
-  GL_POST_CONVOLUTION_ALPHA_BIAS/SCALE was broken.
-  1D convolution state could effect 2D image transfers
-  Overlapping glCopyPixels with negative Y zoom didn't work (bug 10521)
-  Fixed a number of framebuffer/renderbuffer reference counting bugs
-  Fixed a few bugs in software-emulated alpha planes
-  Assorted minor bug fixes in glCopy/DrawPixels, glPixelZoom, etc.
-  Assorted DRI driver bug fixes.
-  Fixed a number of bugs that prevented "depth-peeling" rendering from
   working.

Internal code changes
---------------------

-  Old array_cache module replaced by new vbo module. All geometry
   rendering is now cast in the form of vertex buffer objects.
-  Massive changes to the Shading Language compiler and related state.
-  Vertex/fragment shaders are compiled into GPU instructions and
   programs very similar to GL_ARB_vertex/fragment_program.
-  Vertex and fragment programs are executed with the same code now.
-  The SSE-optimized vertex program path has been removed since it
   didn't support more than 12 temp registers, didn't support
   branching/looping, etc.

To Do (someday) items
---------------------

-  Switch to freeglut
-  Fix linux-glide target/driver.
-  Improved lambda and derivative calculation for frag progs.

Driver Status
-------------

::

   Driver         Status
   ----------------------  ----------------------
   DRI drivers     varies with the driver
   XMesa/GLX (on Xlib) implements OpenGL 2.1
   OSMesa (off-screen) implements OpenGL 2.1
   Windows/Win32       implements OpenGL 2.1
   Glide (3dfx Voodoo1/2)  implements OpenGL 1.3
   SVGA            unsupported
   Wind River UGL      unsupported
   DJGPP           unsupported
   GGI         unsupported
   BeOS            unsupported
   Allegro         unsupported
   D3D         unsupported
