Mesa 8.0.2 Release Notes / March 21, 2012
=========================================

Mesa 8.0.2 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 8.0.1
release.

Mesa 8.0.2 implements the OpenGL 3.0 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being used.
Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL 3.0.

See the :doc:`Compiling/Installing page <../install>` for
prerequisites for DRI hardware acceleration.

MD5 checksums
-------------

::

   70eb3dc74fbfcd72f6776268ee1db52e  MesaLib-8.0.2.tar.gz
   a368104e5700707048dc3e8691a9a7a1  MesaLib-8.0.2.tar.bz2
   d5e5cdb85d2afdbcd1c0623d3ed1c54d  MesaLib-8.0.2.zip

New features
------------

None.

Bug fixes
---------

This list is likely incomplete.

-  `Bug 38720 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=38720>`__ -
   [SNB] Trine triggers a GPU hang
-  `Bug 40059 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=40059>`__ -
   [SNB] hang in "Amnesia: The Dark Descent" demo
-  `Bug 45216 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=45216>`__ -
   [SNB] GPU hang in OilRush
-  `Bug 46631 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=46631>`__ -
   It's really hard to hit the fast path for the fallback glReadPixels
   code
-  `Bug 46679 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=46679>`__ -
   glReadPixels on a luminance texture returns the wrong values
-  `Bug 46311 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=46311>`__ -
   Missing support of point size in Mesa core
-  `Bug 46665 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=46665>`__ -
   [PNV] webgl conformance case max texture fails
-  `Bug 45975 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=45975>`__ -
   [Gen4 + ILK] render with pointcoord will fail to render
-  `Bug 46666 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=46666>`__ -
   [PNV] webgl conformance case NPOT case fails with TEXTURE_MIN_FILTER
   set to LINEAR

Changes
-------

The full set of changes can be viewed by using the following GIT
command:

::

     git log mesa-8.0.1..mesa-8.0.2

Brian Paul (7):

-  svga: add null vs pointer check in update_need_pipeline()
-  util: add mutex lock in u_debug_memory.c code
-  mesa: add \_mesa_rebase_rgba_float/uint() functions
-  mesa: use \_mesa_rebase_rgba_float/uint() in glReadPixels code
-  mesa: use \_mesa_rebase_rgba_float/uint() in glGetTexImage code
-  mesa: fix GL_LUMINANCE handling in glGetTexImage
-  docs: add links to 8.0.1 release notes

Daniel Vetter (1):

-  i965: fixup W-tile offset computation to take swizzling into account

Dylan Noblesmith (1):

-  mesa: add back glGetnUniform*v() overflow error reporting

Ian Romanick (1):

-  docs: Add 8.0.1 release md5sums

Jakob Bornecrantz (3):

-  mesa: Include mesa ES mapi generated files
-  mesa: Bump version number to 8.0.2
-  docs: Add 8.0.2 release notes

Jeremy Huddleston (3):

-  darwin: config file cleanups
-  darwin: Build create_context.c
-  darwin: Link against libxcb

José Fonseca (1):

-  svga: Clamp advertised PIPE_SHADER_CAP_MAX_TEMPS to
   SVGA3D_TEMPREG_MAX.

Kenneth Graunke (2):

-  i965: Only set Last Render Target Select on the last FB write.
-  i965: Fix Gen6+ dynamic state upper bound on older kernels.

Marek Olšák (1):

-  gallium/rtasm: properly detect SSE and SSE2

Neil Roberts (1):

-  mesa: Don't disable fast path for normalized types

Tom Stellard (1):

-  r300/compiler: Fix bug when lowering KILP on r300 cards

Yuanhan Liu (6):

-  mesa: let GL3 buf obj queries not depend on opengl major version
-  tnl: let \_TNL_ATTRIB_POINTSIZE do not depend on
   ctx->VertexProgram._Enabled
-  i915: fix wrong rendering of gl_PointSize on Pineview
-  i915: move the FALLBACK_DRAW_OFFSET check outside the drawing rect
   check
-  i965: handle gl_PointCoord for Gen4 and Gen5 platforms
-  i915: fallback for NPOT cubemap texture

Zack Rusin (3):

-  svga: fix a crash happening before setting fragment shaders.
-  svga: Fix stencil op mapping
-  svga: fix the rasterizer state resets
