Mesa 8.0.5 Release Notes / October 24, 2012
===========================================

Mesa 8.0.5 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 8.0.4
release.

Mesa 8.0.5 implements the OpenGL 3.0 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being used.
Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL 3.0.

See the :doc:`Compiling/Installing page <../install>` for
prerequisites for DRI hardware acceleration.

MD5 checksums
-------------

::

   cda5d101f43b8784fa60bdeaca4056f2  MesaLib-8.0.5.tar.gz
   01305591073a76b65267f69f27d635a3  MesaLib-8.0.5.tar.bz2
   97f11c00cac8fb98aa0131990086dc8e  MesaLib-8.0.5.zip

New features
------------

None.

Bug fixes
---------

This list is likely incomplete.

-  `Bug 44912 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=44912>`__ -
   [bisected] WebGL conformance/textures/texture-mips tests fails
-  `Bug 46644 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=46644>`__ -
   Sandybridge Mobile: ARBfp TXP with coords from fragment.color doesn't
   apply W divide
-  `Bug 46784 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=46784>`__ -
   MAD using multiply written register fails
-  `Bug 47375 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=47375>`__ -
   Blender crash on startup after upgrade to mesa 8.0.1
-  `Bug 48120 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=48120>`__ -
   GL_EXT_texture_sRGB_decode still broken
-  `Bug 48628 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=48628>`__ -
   [bisected ILK]Oglc fogexp(basic.allCases) regressed
-  `Bug 49772 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=49772>`__ -
   [SNB]Oglc depth-stencil(basic.read.ds) regressed
-  `Bug 52129 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=52129>`__ -
   [Bisected ILK]Piglit
   spec_ARB_shader_texture_lod_execution_glsl-fs-shadow2DGradARB-01
   regressed
-  `Bug 52382 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=52382>`__ -
   [ivb gt1] Severe image corruption and GPU Hang, too many PS threads
-  `Bug 52563 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=52563>`__ -
   build failure - struct radeon_renderbuffer has no member named Base
-  `Bug 53311 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=53311>`__ -
   [Bisected IVB]Oglc
   transform_feedback(advanced.transformFeedback.points) Invalid
   argument
-  `Bug 53314 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=53314>`__ -
   [llvmpipe]
   src/gallium/drivers/llvmpipe/lp_texture.c:920:llvmpipe_get_texture_tile_layout:
   Assertion \`x < lpr->tiles_per_row[level]' failed.
-  `Bug 53316 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=53316>`__ -
   [llvmpipe]
   src/gallium/drivers/llvmpipe/lp_texture.c:601:llvmpipe_get_transfer:
   Assertion \`resource' failed.
-  `Bug 53317 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=53317>`__ -
   [llvmpipe] SIGSEGV src/gallium/auxiliary/gallivm/lp_bld_sample.c:99
-  `Bug 53318 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=53318>`__ -
   [softpipe] sp_state_shader.c:194:softpipe_delete_fs_state: Assertion
   \`var != softpipe->fs_variant' failed.
-  `Bug 53319 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=53319>`__ -
   [softpipe] sp_texture.c:322:softpipe_get_transfer: Assertion \`level
   <= resource->last_level' failed.
-  `Bug 53618 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=53618>`__ -
   [Bisected i915]Piglit glx_GLX_ARB_create_context_NULL_attribute_list
   Aborted
-  `Bug 53972 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=53972>`__ -
   Black Mirror III: too dark
-  `Bug 54183 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=54183>`__ -
   [Bisected ILK regression]many piglit/oglc/ogles2 cases Segmentation
   fault
-  `Bug 54193 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=54193>`__ -
   output_components uninitialized in fs_visitor::emit_fb_writes()
-  `Bug 54301 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=54301>`__ -
   [Bisected ILK regression]Piglit
   glx_GLX_ARB_create_context_forward-compatible_flag_with_3.0
   Segmentation fault
-  `Bug 56211 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=56211>`__ -
   src/mesa/state_tracker/st_cb_texture.c:1123:copy_image_data_to_texture:
   Assertion \`u_minify(stImage->pt->height0, src_level) ==
   stImage->base.Height' failed.

Changes
-------

The full set of changes can be viewed by using the following GIT
command:

::

     git log mesa-8.0.4..mesa-8.0.5

Alex Deucher (3):

-  r600g: 8.0.x support for Trinity
-  r600g: add new Sumo, Palm, BTC pci ids
-  r600g: add additional evergreen pci ids

Andreas Boll (4):

-  docs/relnotes-8.0.4: fix html markup
-  mesa: fix html in shortlog_mesa.sh script
-  mesa: add get-pick-list.sh script into bin/
-  mesa: Bump version number to 8.0.5

Brian Paul (18):

-  mesa: use \_mesa_is_user_fbo() and \_mesa_is_winsys_fbo() functions
-  intel: use \_mesa_is_winsys/user_fbo() helpers
-  st/egl: fix uninitialized pointer bug
-  mesa: added Ian's shortlog_mesa.sh script in bin/
-  mesa: loosen small matrix determinant check
-  xlib: add X error handler around XGetImage() call
-  radeon: set swrast_renderbuffer::ColorType field when mapping
   renderbuffers
-  svga: fix invalid memory reference in needs_to_create_zero()
-  meta: fix glDrawPixels fallback test, stencil drawing
-  radeon: fix Base/base typo
-  st/mesa: fix glCopyTexSubImage crash
-  gallivm: fix crash in lp_sampler_static_state()
-  st/mesa: fix renderbuffer validation bug
-  softpipe: fix softpipe_delete_fs_state() failed assertion
-  mesa: raise GL_INVALID_OPERATION in glGenerateMipmap for missing base
   image
-  st/mesa: s/CALLOC/calloc/ to fix allocation bug
-  mesa: do internal format error checking for glTexStorage()
-  mesa: fix incorrect error for glCompressedSubTexImage

Chad Versace (3):

-  mesa: Don't advertise GLES extensions in GL contexts
-  i830: Fix stack corruption
-  swrast: Fix implicit declaration warnings

Chris Forbes (1):

-  mesa: fix dropped && in glGetStringi()

Christoph Bumiller (1):

-  st/mesa: call update_renderbuffer_surface for sRGB renderbuffers, too

Eric Anholt (9):

-  i965/gen7: Reduce GT1 WM thread count according to updated BSpec.
-  i965/fs: Invalidate live intervals in passes that remove an
   instruction.
-  i965: Fix bug in the old FS backend's projtex() calculation.
-  i965: Add support for GL_SKIP_DECODE_EXT on other SRGB formats.
-  i965/vs: Convert EdgeFlagPointer values appropriately for the VS on
   gen4.
-  i965: Fix accumulator_contains() test to also reject swizzles of the
   dst.
-  mesa: Fix glPopAttrib() behavior on GL_FRAMEBUFFER_SRGB.
-  mesa: In conditional rendering fallback, check the query status.
-  i965: Drop the confusing saturate argument to math instruction setup.

Ian Romanick (8):

-  docs: Add 8.0.4 release md5sums
-  Revert "i965: Avoid unnecessary recompiles for shaders that don't use
   dFdy()."
-  i965: Fix regression in depth texture rendering on pre-SNB
-  dri2: Fix bug in attribute handling for non-desktop OpenGL contexts
-  mesa: Generate an error when glCopyTexImage border is invalid
-  mesa/es: Validate glTexImage border in Mesa code rather than the ES
   wrapper
-  mesa: Allow glGetTexParameter of GL_TEXTURE_SRGB_DECODE_EXT
-  dri_util: Use calloc to allocate \__DRIcontext

Jonas Maebe (1):

-  darwin: do not create double-buffered offscreen pixel formats

Jordan Justen (1):

-  intel: move error on create context to proper path

José Fonseca (1):

-  mesa: disable MSVC global optimization in pack.c

Kenneth Graunke (8):

-  mesa: Use GLdouble for depthMax in final unpack conversions.
-  i965/fs: Initialize output_components[] by filling it with zeros.
-  mesa: Prevent repeated glDeleteShader() from blowing away our
   refcounts.
-  i965: Support MESA_FORMAT_SIGNED_RGBA_16.
-  glsl: Fix #pragma invariant(all) language version check.
-  i965/vs: Don't clobber sampler message MRFs with subexpressions.
-  intel: Move finish_batch() call before MI_BATCH_BUFFER_END and
   padding.
-  i965/fs: Don't use brw->fragment_program in calculate_urb_setup().

Maarten Lankhorst (1):

-  winsys/radeon: Remove unnecessary pipe_thread_destroy in
   radeon_drm_cs_destroy

Marek Olšák (6):

-  mesa: remove assertions that do not allow compressed 2D_ARRAY
   textures
-  r300g: fix colormask with non-BGRA formats
-  r600g: fix RSQ of negative value on Cayman
-  r600g: fix EXP on Cayman
-  r600g: fix instance divisor on Cayman
-  gallium/u_blit: set dst format from pipe_resource, not pipe_surface

Michel Dänzer (2):

-  st/mesa: Fix source miptree level for copying data to finalized
   miptree.
-  st/mesa: Fix assertions for copying texture image to finalized
   miptree.

Niels Ole Salscheider (1):

-  st/mesa: index can be negative in the PROGRAM_CONSTANT case

Paul Berry (5):

-  i965: Compute dFdy() correctly for FBOs.
-  mesa: Add UsesDFdy to struct gl_fragment_program.
-  i965: Avoid unnecessary recompiles for shaders that don't use dFdy().
-  i965/Gen6: Work around GPU hangs due to misaligned depth coordinate
   offsets.
-  i965/Gen7: Work around GPU hangs due to misaligned depth coordinate
   offsets.

Stéphane Marchesin (1):

-  glsl/linker: Avoid buffer over-run in
   parcel_out_uniform_storage::visit_field

Tapani Pälli (2):

-  xmlconfig: use \__progname when building for Android
-  android: do not expose single buffered eglconfigs

Vadim Girlin (1):

-  winsys/radeon: fix relocs caching
