Mesa 9.0.3 Release Notes / February 21th, 2013
==============================================

Mesa 9.0.3 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 9.0.2
release.

Mesa 9.0 implements the OpenGL 3.1 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
3.1. OpenGL 3.1 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because GL_ARB_compatibility is not supported.

MD5 checksums
-------------

::

   168384ac0101f4600a15edd3561acdc7  MesaLib-9.0.3.tar.gz
   d7515cc5116c72ac63d735655bd63689  MesaLib-9.0.3.tar.bz2
   a2e1c794572440fd0d839a7d7dfea00c  MesaLib-9.0.3.zip

New features
------------

None.

Bug fixes
---------

This list is likely incomplete.

-  `Bug 25201 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=25201>`__ -
   Pink artifacts on objects in the distance in ETQW/Quake 4
-  `Bug 31598 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=31598>`__ -
   configure: Doesn't check for python libxml2
-  `Bug 40404 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=40404>`__ -
   [softpipe] piglit glsl-max-varyings regression
-  `Bug 47220 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=47220>`__ -
   [bisected] Oglc pxconv-gettex(basic.allCases) regressed
-  `Bug 48629 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=48629>`__ -
   [bisected i965]Oglc shad-compiler(advanced.TestLessThani) regressed
-  `Bug 54240 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=54240>`__ -
   [swrast] piglit fbo-generatemipmap-filtering regression
-  `Bug 56920 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=56920>`__ -
   [sandybridge][uxa] graphics very glitchy and always flickering
-  `Bug 57166 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=57166>`__ -
   [GM45] Chrome experiment "Stars" crash: brw_fs_emit.cpp:708: brw_reg
   brw_reg_from_fs_reg(fs_reg*): Assertion „!"not reached"“ failed.
-  `Bug 57746 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=57746>`__ -
   build test failure: nouveau_fbo.c:198:3: error: too few arguments to
   function 'nouveau_renderbuffer_del'
-  `Bug 57754 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=57754>`__ -
   [swrast] Mesa 9.1-devel implementation error: Unable to delete
   renderbuffer, no context
-  `Bug 58680 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=58680>`__ -
   [IVB] Graphical glitches in 0 A.D
-  `Bug 58972 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=58972>`__ -
   [softpipe] util/u_tile.c:795:pipe_put_tile_z: Assertion \`0' failed.
-  `Bug 59364 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=59364>`__ -
   [bisected] Mesa build fails: clientattrib.c:33:22: fatal error:
   indirect.h: No such file or directory
-  `Bug 59700 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=59700>`__ -
   [ILK/SNB/IVB Bisected]Oglc vertexshader(advanced.TestLightsTwoSided)
   causes GPU hung
-  `Bug 59873 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=59873>`__ -
   [swrast] piglit ext_framebuffer_multisample-interpolation 0
   centroid-edges regression
-  `Bug 60052 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=60052>`__ -
   [Bisected]Piglit glx_extension_string_sanity fail
-  `Bug 60172 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=60172>`__ -
   Planeshift: triangles where grass would be

Changes
-------

The full set of changes can be viewed by using the following GIT
command:

::

     git log mesa-9.0.2..mesa-9.0.3

Adam Jackson (1):

-  r200: Fix probable thinko in r200EmitArrays

Andreas Boll (7):

-  docs: Add 9.0.2 release md5sums
-  docs: add news item for 9.0.2 release
-  configure.ac: Allow OpenGL ES1 and ES2 only with enabled OpenGL
-  build: require python module libxml2
-  cherry-ignore: Ignore candidates for the 9.1 branch.
-  mesa: Bump version to 9.0.3
-  docs: Add 9.0.3 release notes

Anuj Phogat (1):

-  mesa: Fix GL_LUMINANCE handling for textures in glGetTexImage

Brian Paul (29):

-  st/glx: accept GLX_SAMPLE_BUFFERS/SAMPLES_ARB == 0
-  draw: set precalc_flat flag for AA lines too
-  softpipe: fix up FS variant unbinding / deletion
-  softpipe: fix unreliable FS variant binding bug
-  xlib: handle \_mesa_initialize_visual()'s return value
-  xlib: allow GLX_DONT_CARE for glXChooseFBConfig() attribute values
-  st/glx: allow GLX_DONT_CARE for glXChooseFBConfig() attribute values
-  util: fix addressing bug in pipe_put_tile_z() for
   PIPE_FORMAT_Z32_FLOAT
-  util: add get/put_tile_z() support for
   PIPE_FORMAT_Z32_FLOAT_S8X24_UINT
-  mesa: use GLbitfield64 when copying program inputs
-  svga: add NULL pointer check in svga_create_sampler_state()
-  vbo: add a null pointer check to handle OOM instead of crashing
-  osmesa: use \_mesa_generate_mipmap() for mipmap generation, not meta
-  xlib: use \_mesa_generate_mipmap() for mipmap generation, not meta
-  st/mesa: set ctx->Const.MaxSamples = 0, not 1
-  mesa: fix-up and use \_mesa_delete_renderbuffer()
-  mesa: pass context parameter to gl_renderbuffer::Delete()
-  st/mesa: fix context use-after-free problem in
   st_renderbuffer_delete()
-  dri_glx: fix use after free report
-  mesa: remove warning message in \_mesa_reference_renderbuffer_()
-  st/mesa: add null pointer check in st_renderbuffer_delete()
-  util: add some defensive coding in u_upload_alloc()
-  st/mesa: do proper error checking for u_upload_alloc() calls
-  util: add new error checking code in vbuf helper
-  mesa: don't enable GL_EXT_framebuffer_multisample for software
   drivers
-  st/mesa: only enable GL_EXT_framebuffer_multisample if GL_MAX_SAMPLES
   >= 2
-  mesa: don't expose IBM_rasterpos_clip in a core context
-  svga: fix sRGB rendering
-  nouveau: Fix build.

Chad Versace (1):

-  i965/disasm: Fix horizontal stride of dest registers

Eric Anholt (5):

-  i965/fs: Fix the gen6-specific if handling for 80ecb8f15b9ad7d6edc
-  i965/fs: Don't generate saturates over existing variable values.
-  i965: Actually add support for GL_ANY_SAMPLES_PASSED from GL_ARB_oq2.
-  i965/vs: Try again when we've successfully spilled a reg.
-  i965/gen7: Set up all samplers even if samplers are sparsely used.

Frank Henigman (1):

-  mesa: add bounds checking for uniform array access

Jerome Glisse (1):

-  r600g: add cs memory usage accounting and limit it v3 (backport for
   mesa 9.0)

Jordan Justen (1):

-  unpack: support unpacking MESA_FORMAT_ARGB2101010

José Fonseca (2):

-  mesa/st: Don't use 4bits for GL_UNSIGNED_BYTE_3_3_2(_REV)
-  draw: Properly limit vertex buffer fetches on draw arrays.

Kenneth Graunke (19):

-  i965: Fix primitive restart on Haswell.
-  i965: Refactor texture swizzle generation into a helper.
-  i965: Do texture swizzling in hardware on Haswell.
-  i965: Lower textureGrad() with samplerCubeShadow.
-  i965: Use Haswell's sample_d_c for textureGrad with shadow samplers.
-  i965: Add chipset limits for Haswell GT1/GT2.
-  cherry-ignore: Ignore i965 guardband bug fixes.
-  i965: Add missing \_NEW_BUFFERS dirty bit in Gen7 SBE state.
-  i965/vs: Create a 'lod_type' temporary for ir->lod_info.lod->type.
-  i965/vs: Set LOD to 0 for ordinary texture() calls.
-  i965/vs: Store texturing results into a vec4 temporary.
-  cherry-ignore: Ignore candidates for the 9.1 branch.
-  mesa: Disable GL_NV_primitive_restart extension in core contexts.
-  glsl: Track UBO block names in the symbol table.
-  build: Fix build on systems where /usr/bin/python isn't python 2.
-  i965: Refactor Gen6+ SF attribute override code.
-  i965: Compute the maximum SF source attribute.
-  i965: Fix the SF Vertex URB Read Length calculation for Sandybridge.
-  i965: Fix the SF Vertex URB Read Length calculation for Gen7
   platforms.

Marek Olšák (3):

-  r600g: fix int->bool conversion in fence_signalled
-  gallium/u_upload_mgr: fix a serious memory leak
-  r300g: fix blending with blend color and RGBA formats

Matt Turner (3):

-  mesa: Return 0 for XFB_VARYING_MAX_LENGTH if no varyings
-  mesa: Set transform feedback's default buffer mode to
   INTERLEAVED_ATTRIBS
-  mesa/uniform_query: Don't write to \*params if there is an error

Michel Dänzer (1):

-  configure.ac: GLX cannot work without OpenGL

Paul Berry (1):

-  mesa: Allow glReadBuffer(GL_NONE) for winsys framebuffers.

Roland Scheidegger (1):

-  softpipe: fix using optimized filter function

Stefan Dösinger (3):

-  meta: Disable GL_FRAGMENT_SHADER_ATI in MESA_META_SHADER
-  radeon: Initialize swrast before setting limits
-  r200: Initialize swrast before setting limits

Zack Rusin (2):

-  glx: only advertise GLX_INTEL_swap_event if it's supported
-  DRI2: Don't disable GLX_INTEL_swap_event unconditionally
