Mesa 9.1.4 Release Notes / July 1st, 2013
=========================================

Mesa 9.1.4 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 9.1.3
release.

Mesa 9.1 implements the OpenGL 3.1 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
3.1. OpenGL 3.1 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because GL_ARB_compatibility is not supported.

MD5 checksums
-------------

::

   a2c4e25d0e27918bc67f61bae04d0cb8  MesaLib-9.1.4.tar.bz2
   8c7e9ce5b05cb2223f0587396dd9dc08  MesaLib-9.1.4.tar.gz
   020459c5793d4279bdcb2daa1f7dd9f6  MesaLib-9.1.4.zip

New features
------------

None.

Bug fixes
---------

This list is likely incomplete.

-  `Bug 37871 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=37871>`__ -
   [bisected i965] Bus error (core dumped) on oglc texdecaltile
-  `Bug 42182 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=42182>`__ -
   egl/opengles1/tri_x11 renders wrong
-  `Bug 44958 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=44958>`__ -
   [SNB IVB HSW] mesa demo test texleak bus error
-  `Bug 53494 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=53494>`__ -
   [snb] crash in texsubimage to a large atlas in clutter
-  `Bug 60518 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=60518>`__ -
   glDrawElements segfault when compiled into display list
-  `Bug 61821 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=61821>`__ -
   src/mesa/drivers/dri/common/xmlpool.h:96:29: fatal error:
   xmlpool/options.h
-  `Bug 63520 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=63520>`__ -
   r300g regression (RV380): Strange rendering of light sources in
   Penumbra (bisected)
-  `Bug 63701 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=63701>`__ -
   [HSW] support new haswell graphics [8086:0a2e]
-  `Bug 64727 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=64727>`__ -
   [gm45, bisected] some piglit glsl 1.10 built-in-functions tests crash
-  `Bug 64745 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=64745>`__ -
   [llvmpipe] SIGSEGV src/gallium/state_trackers/glx/xlib/glx_api.c:1374
-  `Bug 64934 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=64934>`__ -
   [llvmpipe] SIGSEGV src/gallium/state_trackers/glx/xlib/glx_api.c:1363
-  `Bug 65173 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=65173>`__ -
   segfault in \_mesa_get_format_datatype and \_mesa_get_color_read_type
   when state dumping with glretrace

Changes
-------

The full set of changes can be viewed by using the following GIT
command:

::

     git log mesa-9.1.3..mesa-9.1.4

Alan Coopersmith (2):

-  integer overflow in XF86DRIOpenConnection() [CVE-2013-1993 1/2]
-  integer overflow in XF86DRIGetClientDriverName() [CVE-2013-1993 2/2]

Alex Deucher (3):

-  radeonsi: add support for hainan chips
-  radeonsi: add Hainan pci ids
-  winsys/radeon: add env var to disable VM on Cayman/Trinity

pp

Andreas Boll (1):

-  glapi: Add some missing static_dispatch="false" annotations to
   es_EXT.xml

Anuj Phogat (1):

-  intel: Add a null pointer check before dereferencing the pointer

Armin K (1):

-  gallivm: Fix build with LLVM 3.3

Brian Paul (9):

-  mesa: fix the compressed TexSubImage size checking code
-  st/mesa: generate GL_OUT_OF_MEMORY if we can't create the index
   buffer
-  mesa: fix error checking of DXT sRGB formats in
   \_mesa_base_tex_format()
-  st/glx/xlib: check for null ctx pointer in glXIsDirect()
-  xlib: check for null ctx pointer in glXIsDirect()
-  st/glx: add null ctx check in glXDestroyContext()
-  xlib: add null ctx check in glXDestroyContext()
-  meta: move vertex array enables for mipmap generation
-  mesa: handle missing read buffer in
   \_mesa_get_color_read_format/type()

Bryan Cain (1):

-  nv50: initialize kick_notify callback in nv50_create

Chad Versace (3):

-  egl/android: Fix error condition for EGL_ANDROID_image_native_buffer
-  i965: Fix glColorPointer(GL_FIXED)
-  intel: Return early if miptree allocation fails

Chia-I Wu (1):

-  u_vbuf: fix index buffer leak

Chris Forbes (8):

-  mesa: add accessor for effective stencil ref
-  intel: Use accessor for stencil reference values
-  nouveau: Use accessor for stencil reference values
-  radeon: Use accessor for stencil reference values
-  st: Use accessor for stencil reference values
-  swrast: Use accessor for stencil reference values
-  mesa: Stop clamping stencil reference value at specification time
-  mesa: Use accessor for stencil reference values in glGet

Chí-Thanh Christopher Nguyễn (1):

-  targets/dri-i915: Force c++ linker in all cases

Daniel Martin (1):

-  Fix build of swrast only without libdrm

Dave Airlie (1):

-  i965: fix problem with constant out of bounds access (v3)

Eric Anholt (10):

-  mesa: Make core Mesa allocate the texture renderbuffer wrapper.
-  mesa: Make gl_renderbuffers backed by EGL images use
   FinishRenderTexture.
-  i965/fs: Bake regs_written into the IR instead of recomputing it
   later.
-  i965/vs: Fix implied_mrf_writes() for integer division pre-gen6.
-  intel: Add support for writing to our linear-temporary-CPU-map case.
-  intel: Do temporary CPU maps of textures that are too big to GTT map.
-  intel: Avoid making tiled miptrees we won't be able to blit.
-  intel: Fix MRT handling of glBitmap().
-  intel: Fix format handling of blit glBitmap()
-  i965: Shut up the last release build warning.

Fabian Bieler (2):

-  mesa/st: Don't copy propagate from swizzles.
-  mesa/program: Don't copy propagate from swizzles.

Frank Henigman (1):

-  intel: initialize fs_visitor::params_remap in constructor

Ian Romanick (2):

-  docs: Add 9.1.3 release md5sums
-  mesa: Bump version to 9.1.4

José Fonseca (1):

-  scons: Fix implicit python dependency discovery on Windows.

Kenneth Graunke (17):

-  mesa: Add i965 varying index patches to .cherry-ignore.
-  i965: Turn brw->urb.vs_size and gs_size into local variables.
-  i965: Use a variable for the push constant size in kB.
-  i965: Update URB partitioning code for Haswell's GT3 variant.
-  i965: Add chipset limits for the Haswell GT3 variant.
-  i965: Enable the Bay Trail platform.
-  mesa: Add a reverted commit to cherry-ignore.
-  vbo: Ignore PRIMITIVE_RESTART_FIXED_INDEX for glDrawArrays().
-  mesa: Add a helper function for determining the restart index.
-  vbo: Use the new primitive restart index helper function.
-  i965: Use the correct restart index for fixed index mode on Haswell.
-  mesa: Cherry-ignore a patch that got picked but squashed.
-  i965: Fix can_cut_index_handle_restart_index() for byte/short types.
-  st/mesa: Go back to using ctx->Array.RestartIndex, not
   \_RestartIndex.
-  mesa: Ignore fixed-index primitive restart in ArrayElement().
-  mesa: Delete the ctx->Array._RestartIndex derived state.
-  glsl: Bail on parsing if the #version directive is bogus.

Lauri Kasanen (1):

-  r600g: Correctly initialize the shader key, v2

Maarten Lankhorst (4):

-  nvc0: fix up video buffer alignment requirements
-  nvc0: kill assert in ppp code
-  nvc0: set rsvd_kick correctly
-  nvc0: allow frame dropping in h264

Marek Olšák (7):

-  radeonsi: increase array size for shader inputs and outputs
-  vbo: fix possible use-after-free segfault after a VAO is deleted
-  glsl: fix the value of gl_MaxFragmentUniformVectors
-  st/mesa: initialize all program constants and UBO limits
-  st/mesa: initialize Const.MaxColorAttachments
-  st/mesa: fix a couple of issues in st_bind_ubos
-  mesa: declare UniformBufferBindings as an array with a static size

Matt Turner (3):

-  configure.ac: Remove redundant checks of enable_dri.
-  configure.ac: Build dricommon for DRI gallium drivers
-  i965: NULL check depth_mt to quiet static analysis.

Michel Dänzer (3):

-  radeonsi: Fix handling of TGSI_SEMANTIC_PSIZE
-  radeonsi: Fix user clip planes
-  mesa: Note that two radeonsi fixes cannot be backported after all

Mike Stroyan (1):

-  configure.ac: Build dricommon for gallium swrast

Naohiro Aota (1):

-  xmlpool/build: Make sure to set mo properly

Paul Berry (2):

-  glsl: Fix error checking on "flat" keyword to match GLSL ES 3.00,
   GLSL 1.50.
-  i965/gen7.5: Allow HW primitive restart for all primitive types.

Paulo Zanoni (1):

-  i965: make GT3 machines work as GT3 instead of GT2

Rodrigo Vivi (2):

-  i965: Add missing Haswell GT3 Desktop to IS_HSW_GT3 check.
-  i965: Adding more reserved PCI IDs for Haswell.

Roland Scheidegger (1):

-  gallivm: fix out-of-bounds access with mirror_clamp_to_edge address
   mode

Stéphane Marchesin (2):

-  st/xlib: Fix upside down coordinates for CopySubBuffer
-  st/xlib: Flush the front buffer before doing CopySubBuffer

Sven Joachim (1):

-  mesa: Fix ieee fp on Alpha

Tapani Pälli (1):

-  mesa: fix type comparison errors in sub-texture error checking code

Tom Stellard (2):

-  gallivm: Fix build with LLVM >= r180063
-  r300g/compiler: Prevent regalloc from swizzling texture operands v2

Vinson Lee (1):

-  radeon: Initialize variables in radeon_llvm_context_init.
