Mesa 9.2.1 Release Notes / (October 4, 2013)
============================================

Mesa 9.2.1 is a bug fix release which fixes bugs found since the 9.2
release.

Mesa 9.2 implements the OpenGL 3.1 API, but the version reported by
glGetString(GL_VERSION) or glGetIntegerv(GL_MAJOR_VERSION) /
glGetIntegerv(GL_MINOR_VERSION) depends on the particular driver being
used. Some drivers don't support all the features required in OpenGL
3.1. OpenGL 3.1 is **only** available if requested at context creation
because GL_ARB_compatibility is not supported.

MD5 checksums
-------------

::

   e6cdfa84dfddd86e3d36ec7ff4b6478a  MesaLib-9.2.1.tar.gz
   dd4c82667d9c19c28a553b12eba3f8a0  MesaLib-9.2.1.tar.bz2
   d9af0f5607f7d275793d293057ca9ac6  MesaLib-9.2.1.zip

New features
------------

None

Bug fixes
---------

This list is likely incomplete.

-  `Bug 66779 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=66779>`__ -
   Use of uninitialized stack variable with brw_search_cache()
-  `Bug 68233 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=68233>`__ -
   Valgrind errors in mesa
-  `Bug 68250 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=68250>`__ -
   Automatic mipmap generation with texture compression produces borders
   that fade to black
-  `Bug 68637 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=68637>`__ -
   [Bisected IVB/HSW]Unigine demo crash
-  `Bug 68753 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=68753>`__ -
   [regression bisected] GLSL ES: structs members can't have precision
   qualifiers anymore in 9.2
-  `Bug 69525 <https://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=69525>`__ -
   [GM45, bisected] Piglit tex-shadow2drect fails

Changes
-------

The full set of changes can be viewed by using the following GIT
command:

::

     git log mesa-9.2..mesa-9.2.1

Alex Deucher (1):

-  radeon/winsys: pad IBs to a multiple of 8 DWs

Andreas Boll (1):

-  os: First check for \__GLIBC_\_ and then for PIPE_OS_BSD

Anuj Phogat (1):

-  glsl: Allow precision qualifiers for sampler types

Brian Paul (2):

-  docs: minor fixes for 9.2 release notes
-  mesa: check for bufSize > 0 in \_mesa_GetSynciv()

Carl Worth (3):

-  cherry-ignore: Ignore a commit which appeared twice on master
-  Use -Bsymbolic when linking libEGL.so
-  mesa: Bump version to 9.2.1

Chris Forbes (3):

-  i965/fs: Gen4: Zero out extra coordinates when using shadow compare
-  i965: Fix cube array coordinate normalization
-  i965: fix bogus swizzle in brw_cubemap_normalize

Christoph Bumiller (2):

-  nvc0/ir: add f32 long immediate cannot saturate
-  nvc0: delete compute object on screen destruction

Dave Airlie (1):

-  st/mesa: don't dereference stObj->pt if NULL

Dominik Behr (1):

-  glsl: propagate max_array_access through function calls

Emil Velikov (1):

-  nouveau: initialise the nouveau_transfer maps

Eric Anholt (4):

-  mesa: Rip out more extension checking from texformat.c.
-  mesa: Don't choose S3TC for generic compression if we can't compress.
-  i965/gen4: Fix fragment program rectangle texture shadow compares.
-  i965: Reenable glBitmap() after the sRGB winsys enabling.

Ian Romanick (7):

-  docs: Add 9.2 release md5sums
-  Add .cherry-ignore file
-  mesa: Note that 89a665e should not be picked
-  glsl: Reallow precision qualifiers on structure members
-  mesa: Support GL_MAX_VERTEX_OUTPUT_COMPONENTS query with ES3
-  mesa: Remove all traces of GL_OES_matrix_get
-  mesa: Don't return any data for GL_SHADER_BINARY_FORMATS

Ilia Mirkin (2):

-  nv30: find first unused texcoord rather than bailing if first is used
-  nv30: fix inconsistent setting of push->user_priv

Joakim Sindholt (1):

-  nvc0: fix blitctx memory leak

Johannes Obermayr (1):

-  st/gbm: Add $(WAYLAND_CFLAGS) for HAVE_EGL_PLATFORM_WAYLAND.

Kenneth Graunke (5):

-  i965/vs: Detect GRF sources in split_virtual_grfs send-from-GRF code.
-  i965/fs: Detect GRF sources in split_virtual_grfs send-from-GRF code.
-  i965/vec4: Only zero out unused message components when there are
   any.
-  i965: Fix brw_vs_prog_data_compare to actually check field members.
-  meta: Set correct viewport and projection in
   decompress_texture_image.

Maarten Lankhorst (2):

-  st/dri: do not create a new context for msaa copy
-  nvc0: restore viewport after blit

Marek Olšák (2):

-  r600g: fix constant buffer cache flushing
-  r600g: fix texture buffer object cache flushing

Paul Berry (1):

-  i965: Initialize inout_offset parameter to brw_search_cache().

Rico Schüller (1):

-  glx: Initialize OpenGL version to 1.0

Tiziano Bacocco (1):

-  nvc0/ir: fix use after free in texture barrier insertion pass

Torsten Duwe (1):

-  wayland-egl.pc requires wayland-client.pc.
