<?xml version="1.0" ?>
<!DOCTYPE refentry PUBLIC "-//KDE//DTD DocBook XML V4.5-Based Variant V1.1//EN" "dtd/kdedbx45.dtd" [
<!ENTITY % English "INCLUDE">
]>

<refentry lang="&language;">
<refentryinfo>
<title>&kate; User's Manual</title>
<author>&Lauri.Watts; &Lauri.Watts.mail;</author>
<date>2021-07-12</date>
<releaseinfo>KDE Gear 21.08</releaseinfo>
<productname>KDE Gear</productname>
</refentryinfo>

<refmeta>
<refentrytitle><command>kate</command></refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</refmeta>

<refnamediv>
<refname><command>kate</command></refname>
<refpurpose>Advanced text editor by &kde;</refpurpose>
</refnamediv>

<refsynopsisdiv>
<cmdsynopsis>
<command>kate</command>
<group choice="opt"><option>-s, --start</option> <replaceable>
name</replaceable> </group>
<group choice="opt"><option>--startanon</option></group>
<group choice="opt"><option>--new-session</option></group>
<group choice="opt"><option>-n, --new</option></group>
<group choice="opt"><option>-b, --block</option></group>
<group choice="opt"><option>-p, --pid</option><replaceable>
pid</replaceable></group>
<group choice="opt"><option>-e, --encoding</option> <replaceable>
name</replaceable></group>
<group choice="opt"><option>-l, --line</option> <replaceable>
line</replaceable></group>
<group choice="opt"><option>-c, --column</option>
<replaceable> column</replaceable></group>
<group choice="opt"><option>-i, --stdin</option></group>
<group choice="opt"><option>--tempfile</option></group>
<group choice="opt"><option><replaceable>file</replaceable></option></group>
</cmdsynopsis>
</refsynopsisdiv>

<refsect1>
<title>Description</title>
<para>&kate; is the &kde; Advanced Text Editor. </para>
<para>&kate; also provides the editor part for various applications, under
the name &kwrite;.</para>
<para>Some of &kate;'s many features include configurable syntax
highlighting for languages ranging from C and C++ to
&HTML; to bash scripts, the ability to create and
maintain projects, a multiple document interface
(<acronym>MDI</acronym>), and a self-contained terminal emulator.
</para>

<para>
But &kate; is more than a programmer's editor. Its ability to open
several files at once makes it ideal for editing &UNIX;'s many
configuration files.  This document was written in &kate;.
</para>


</refsect1>

<refsect1>
<title>Options</title>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term><option>-s</option>, <option>--start</option> <replaceable>name</replaceable></term>
<listitem><para>Start &kate; with a given session.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><option>--startanon</option></term>
<listitem><para>Start &kate; with a new anonymous session, implies <option>-n</option> (deprecated).</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><option>--new-session</option></term>
<listitem><para>Start &kate; with a new anonymous session, implies <option>-n</option>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><option>-n</option>, <option>--new</option></term>
<listitem><para>Force start of a new &kate; instance (is ignored if <option>start</option> is used and another
&kate; instance already has the given session opened), forced if no parameters and no URLs
are given at all.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><option>-b</option>, <option>--block</option></term>
<listitem><para>If using an already running &kate; instance, block until it exits,
if URLs given to open.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><option>-p, --pid</option> <replaceable>
pid</replaceable></term>
<listitem><para>Only try to reuse kate instance with this
<replaceable>pid</replaceable> (is ignored if <option>start</option> is used and another
&kate; instance already has the given session opened).</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><option>-e, --encoding</option> <replaceable>
name</replaceable></term>
<listitem><para>Set encoding for the file to open.</para><para>You can use
this to force a file opened in utf-8 format, for instance.  (The command
<command>iconv -l</command> provides a list of encodings, which may be
helpful to you.)</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><option>-l, --line</option> <replaceable> line</replaceable></term>
<listitem><para>Navigate to this line.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><option>-c, --column</option> <replaceable>
column</replaceable></term>
<listitem><para>Navigate to this column.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><option>-i, --stdin</option></term>
<listitem><para>Read the contents of
<filename>stdin</filename>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><option>--tempfile</option></term>
<listitem><para>The files/&URL;s opened by the application will be
deleted after use.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term><option><replaceable>file</replaceable></option></term>
<listitem><para>File to open.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>

</refsect1>

<refsect1>
<title>See Also</title>

<simplelist><member>More detailed user documentation is available from <ulink
url="help:/kate">help:/kate</ulink>
(either enter this &URL; into &konqueror;, or run
<userinput><command>khelpcenter</command>
<parameter>help:/kate</parameter></userinput>).</member>
<member>kf5options(7)</member>
<member>qt5options(7)</member>
<member>There is also further information available at the <ulink
url="https://kate-editor.org/">&kate; website</ulink>.</member>
</simplelist>
</refsect1>

<refsect1>
<title>Examples</title>

<para>To open a file named <filename>source.cpp</filename> at column 15,
line 25, in an existing &kate; window, you could use:</para>
<screen>
<userinput><command>kate</command> <option>-c 15</option> <option>-l 25</option> <filename>source.cpp</filename></userinput>
</screen>

<para>If you have an active internet connection, you can take advantage of
&kde;'s network transparency to open a file from an &FTP; site. If you do not
have write permission on the remote server, the file will be opened read
only and you will be prompted for a local filename to save to if you make
changes.  If you do have write permission, changes will be saved
transparently over the network.</para>
<screen><userinput><command>kate</command> <option><replaceable>&kde-ftp;README</replaceable></option></userinput></screen>

<!-- FIXME: Some more useful examples would be cool, how about this snagged -->
<!-- from a mail of anders (slightly edited /line/l to remove the double -->
<!-- dashes:

> /some/file/path/file.name:lineno
> it would rock if Kate could understand that and not only open up file.name,
> but jump to lineno after the file is opened.

How bad is it to have to convert that into
-l lineno /some/file/path/file.name

sed s,([^:]*):(\d+),-l \2 \1,

will do that, for example.-->

</refsect1>

<refsect1>
<title>Authors</title>
<para>The maintainer of &kate; is &Christoph.Cullmann;
&Christoph.Cullmann.mail;.  A comprehensive list of authors and contributors
is available in the complete user manual mentioned above.</para>
</refsect1>

</refentry>
