@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c This is the Texinfo source file for the gp-collect-app man page.
@c
@c Author: Ruud van der Pas
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@ifset man
\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename gprofng archive
@settitle Archive gprofng experiment data
@include gp-macros.texi
@end ifset

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c This is from the man-pages(7) man page
@c
@c "The list below shows conventional or suggested sections.  Most manual pages
@c  should include at least the highlighted sections.  Arrange a new manual
@c  page so that sections are placed in the order shown in the list."
@c
@c              NAME
@c              SYNOPSIS
@c              CONFIGURATION    [Normally only in Section 4]
@c              DESCRIPTION
@c              OPTIONS          [Normally only in Sections 1, 8]
@c              EXIT STATUS      [Normally only in Sections 1, 8]
@c              RETURN VALUE     [Normally only in Sections 2, 3]
@c              ERRORS           [Typically only in Sections 2, 3]
@c              ENVIRONMENT
@c              FILES
@c              VERSIONS         [Normally only in Sections 2, 3]
@c              ATTRIBUTES       [Normally only in Sections 2, 3]
@c              CONFORMING TO
@c              NOTES
@c              BUGS
@c              EXAMPLES
@c              AUTHORS          [Discouraged]
@c              REPORTING BUGS   [Not used in man-pages]
@c              COPYRIGHT        [Not used in man-pages]
@c              SEE ALSO
@c
@c This is what the texi2pod.pl tool recognizes:
@c
@c for $sect (qw(NAME SYNOPSIS TARGET DESCRIPTION OPTIONS ENVIRONMENT FILES
@c               BUGS NOTES FOOTNOTES SEEALSO AUTHOR COPYRIGHT)) {
@c
@c What is interesting is that it places "SEE ALSO" before "COPYRIGHT", which
@c makes sense and adhered to for the other formats.
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c NAME section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{NAME}
@c man begin NAME

gprofng archive - Archive gprofng experiment data

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c SYNOPSIS section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{SYNOPSIS}
@c man begin SYNOPSIS

@command{gprofng archive} [@var{option(s)}] @var{experiment}

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c DESCRIPTION section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{DESCRIPTION}
@c man begin DESCRIPTION

Archive the associated application binaries and source files in a gprofng
experiment to make it self contained and portable.

By default, the binaries are archived, but the application source files
are not archived.  Use this tool to change this and afterwards archive
additional components.

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c OPTIONS section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{OPTIONS}
@c man begin OPTIONS

@table @gcctabopt

@item --version
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options, @code{--version}}
@end ifclear

Print the version number and exit.

@item --help
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options, @code{--help}}
@end ifclear

Print usage information and exit.

@c -- @item --verbose @{on|off@}
@c -- @ifclear man
@c -- @IndexSubentry{Options, @code{--verbose}}
@c -- @end ifclear

@c -- Enable (on) or disable (off) verbose mode; the default is @samp{off}.

@item -a @{off|on|ldobjects|src|usedldobjects|usedsrc@}
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options, @code{-a}}
@end ifclear

Specify archiving of binaries and other files.  In addition to disable this
feature (off), or enable archiving off all loadobjects and sources (on),
the  other  op tions support a more refined selection.

All of these options enable archiving, but the keyword controls what exactly
is selected: all load objects (ldobjects), all source files (src), the
loadobjects asscoiated with a program counter (usedldobjects), or the source
files associated with a program counter (usedsrc).
The default is @samp{-a ldobjects}.

@item -n
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options, @code{-n}}
@end ifclear

Archive the named experiment only, not any of its descendants.

@item -m @var{regex}
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options, @code{-m}}
@end ifclear

Archive only those source, object, and debug info files whose full path name
matches the given POSIX compliant @var{regex} regular expression.

@item -q
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options, @code{-q}}
@end ifclear

Do not write any warnings to stderr.  Warnings are incorporated into the
.archive file in the experiment directory.  They are shown in the output 
of @command{gprofng display text}.

@item -F
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options, @code{-F}}
@end ifclear

Force writing or rewriting of the archive.  This is ignored with the 
@samp{-n} or @samp{-m} option, or if this is a subexperiment.

@item -d @var{path}
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options, @code{-d}}
@end ifclear

The @var{path} is the absolute path path to a common archive, which is a
directory that contains archived files.  If the directory does not
exist, then it will be created.  Files are saved in the common archive
directory, and a symbolic link is created in the experiment archive.

@end table

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c NOTES section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{NOTES}
@c man begin NOTES

Default archiving does not occur in case the application profiled terminates
prematurely, or if archiving is disabled when collecting the performance data.
In such cases, this tool can be used to afterwards archive the information,
but it has to be run on the same system where the profiling data was recorded.

Some Java applications store shared objects in jar files.  By default, such
shared objects are not automatically archived.  To archive shared objects
contained in jar files, the addpath directive in an .er.rc file. The addpath
directive should give the path to the jar file, including the jar file itself.
The .er.rc file should be saved in the user home directory or parent of the
experiment directory.

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c SEEALSO section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{SEEALSO}
@c man begin SEEALSO

gprofng(1), gp-collect-app(1), gp-display-html(1), gp-display-src(1), gp-display-text(1)

The user guide for gprofng is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the info
and gprofng programs are correctly installed, the command
@command{info gprofng} should give access to this document.

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c COPYRIGHT section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{COPYRIGHT}
@c man begin COPYRIGHT

Copyright @copyright{} 2022-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no
Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the
section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c If this text is used for a man page, exit.  Otherwise we need to continue.
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ifset man
@bye
@end ifset
