@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c This is the Texinfo source file for the gp-collect-app man page.
@c
@c Author: Ruud van der Pas
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@ifset man
\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename gprofng display src
@settitle Display the source code, optionally interleaved with the disassembly of the target object
@include gp-macros.texi
@end ifset

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c This is from the man-pages(7) man page
@c
@c "The list below shows conventional or suggested sections.  Most manual pages
@c  should include at least the highlighted sections.  Arrange a new manual
@c  page so that sections are placed in the order shown in the list."
@c
@c              NAME
@c              SYNOPSIS
@c              CONFIGURATION    [Normally only in Section 4]
@c              DESCRIPTION
@c              OPTIONS          [Normally only in Sections 1, 8]
@c              EXIT STATUS      [Normally only in Sections 1, 8]
@c              RETURN VALUE     [Normally only in Sections 2, 3]
@c              ERRORS           [Typically only in Sections 2, 3]
@c              ENVIRONMENT
@c              FILES
@c              VERSIONS         [Normally only in Sections 2, 3]
@c              ATTRIBUTES       [Normally only in Sections 2, 3]
@c              CONFORMING TO
@c              NOTES
@c              BUGS
@c              EXAMPLES
@c              AUTHORS          [Discouraged]
@c              REPORTING BUGS   [Not used in man-pages]
@c              COPYRIGHT        [Not used in man-pages]
@c              SEE ALSO
@c
@c This is what the texi2pod.pl tool recognizes:
@c
@c for $sect (qw(NAME SYNOPSIS TARGET DESCRIPTION OPTIONS ENVIRONMENT FILES
@c               BUGS NOTES FOOTNOTES SEEALSO AUTHOR COPYRIGHT)) {
@c
@c What is interesting is that it places "SEE ALSO" before "COPYRIGHT", which
@c makes sense and adhered to for the other formats.
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c NAME section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{NAME}
@c man begin NAME

gprofng display src - Display the source code, optionally interleaved with the disassembly of the target object

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c SYNOPSIS section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{SYNOPSIS}
@c man begin SYNOPSIS

@command{gprofng display src} [@var{option(s)}] @var{target_file}

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c DESCRIPTION section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{DESCRIPTION}
@c man begin DESCRIPTION

Display the source code listing, or source code interleaved with disassembly code,
as extracted from the target file (an executable, shared object, object file, or a
Java .class file).

For example, this command displays the source code and disassembly listing for a
function called @samp{mxv_core} that is part of object file @samp{mxv.o}:

@smallexample
$ gprofng display src -disasm mxv_core mxv.o
@end smallexample

To list the source code and disassembly for all the functions in this file,
use the following command:

@smallexample
$ gprofng display src -disasm all -1 mxv.o
@end smallexample

The @var{target_file} is the name of an executable, a shared object, an object
file (.o), or a Java .class file.

If no options are given, the source code listing of the @var{target_file}
is shown.  This is equivalent to @samp{-source all -1}.  If this information
is not available, a message to this extent is printed.

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c OPTIONS section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{OPTIONS}
@c man begin OPTIONS

@table @gcctabopt

@item --version
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options, @code{--version}}
@end ifclear

Print the version number and exit.

@item --help
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options, @code{--help}}
@end ifclear

Print usage information and exit.

@c -- @item --verbose @{on|off@}
@c -- @ifclear man
@c -- @IndexSubentry{Options, @code{--verbose}}
@c -- @end ifclear

@c -- Enable (on) or disable (off) verbose mode; the default is @samp{off}.

@item -functions
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options,  @code{-functions}}
@IndexSubentry{Commands, @code{functions}}
@end ifclear
List all the functions from the given object.

@item -source @var{item} @var{tag}
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options, @code{-source}}
@IndexSubentry{Commands, @code{source}}
@end ifclear
Show the source code for @var{item} in @var{target_file}.  The @var{tag}
is used to differentiate in case there are multiple occurences with the same
name.
See the @samp{NOTES} section for the definition of @var{item} and @var{tag}. 

@item -disasm @var{item} @var{tag}
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options,  @code{-disasm}}
@IndexSubentry{Commands, @code{disasm}}
@end ifclear
Include the disassembly in the source listing. The default listing does not
include the disassembly. If the source code is not available, show a listing
of the disassembly only.
See the @samp{NOTES} section for the definition of @var{item} and @var{tag}. 

@item -outfile @var{filename}
@ifclear man
@IndexSubentry{Options,  @code{-outfile}}
@IndexSubentry{Commands, @code{outfile}}
@end ifclear
Write results to file @var{filename}.  A dash (-) writes to stdout. This is also
the default. Note that this option only affects those options included to the
right of this option.

@end table

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c NOTES section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{NOTES}
@c man begin NOTES

Use @var{item} to specify the name of a function, or of a source or object
file that was used to build the executable, or shared object.

The @var{tag} is an index used to determine which item is being referred
to when multiple functions have the same name. It is required, but will
be ignored if not necessary to resolve the function.

The @var{item} may also be specified in the form @samp{function`file`}, in
which case the source or disassembly of the named function in the source
context of the named file will be used.

The special @var{item} and @var{tag} combination @samp{all -1}, is used to
indicate generating the source, or disassembly, for all functions in the
@var{target_file}.

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c SEEALSO section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{SEEALSO}
@c man begin SEEALSO

gprofng(1), gp-archive(1), gp-collect-app(1), gp-display-html(1), gp-display-text(1)

The user guide for gprofng is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the info
and gprofng programs are correctly installed, the command
@command{info gprofng} should give access to this document.

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c COPYRIGHT section
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ManPageStart{COPYRIGHT}
@c man begin COPYRIGHT

Copyright @copyright{} 2022-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no
Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the
section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.

@c man end
@ManPageEnd{}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c If this text is used for a man page, exit.  Otherwise we need to continue.
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ifset man
@bye
@end ifset
