@item aa
Afar.
@item ab
Abkhazian.
@item ae
Avestan.
@item af
Afrikaans.
@item ak
Akan.
@item am
Amharic.
@item an
Aragonese.
@item ar
Arabic.
@item as
Assamese.
@item av
Avaric.
@item ay
Aymara.
@item az
Azerbaijani.
@item ba
Bashkir.
@item be
Belarusian.
@item bg
Bulgarian.
@item bh
Bihari languages.
@item bi
Bislama.
@item bm
Bambara.
@item bn
Bengali.
@item bo
Tibetan.
@item br
Breton.
@item bs
Bosnian.
@item ca
Catalan; Valencian.
@item ce
Chechen.
@item ch
Chamorro.
@item co
Corsican.
@item cr
Cree.
@item cs
Czech.
@item cu
Church Slavic; Old Slavonic; Church Slavonic; Old Bulgarian; Old Church Slavonic.
@item cv
Chuvash.
@item cy
Welsh.
@item da
Danish.
@item de
German.
@item dv
Divehi; Dhivehi; Maldivian.
@item dz
Dzongkha.
@item ee
Ewe.
@item el
Greek, Modern (1453-).
@item en
English.
@item eo
Esperanto.
@item es
Spanish; Castilian.
@item et
Estonian.
@item eu
Basque.
@item fa
Persian.
@item ff
Fulah.
@item fi
Finnish.
@item fj
Fijian.
@item fo
Faroese.
@item fr
French.
@item fy
Western Frisian.
@item ga
Irish.
@item gd
Gaelic; Scottish Gaelic.
@item gl
Galician.
@item gn
Guarani.
@item gu
Gujarati.
@item gv
Manx.
@item ha
Hausa.
@item he
Hebrew.
@item hi
Hindi.
@item ho
Hiri Motu.
@item hr
Croatian.
@item ht
Haitian; Haitian Creole.
@item hu
Hungarian.
@item hy
Armenian.
@item hz
Herero.
@item ia
Interlingua (International Auxiliary Language Association).
@item id
Indonesian.
@item ie
Interlingue; Occidental.
@item ig
Igbo.
@item ii
Sichuan Yi; Nuosu.
@item ik
Inupiak.
@item io
Ido.
@item is
Icelandic.
@item it
Italian.
@item iu
Inuktitut.
@item ja
Japanese.
@item jv
Javanese.
@item ka
Georgian.
@item kg
Kongo.
@item ki
Kikuyu; Gikuyu.
@item kj
Kuanyama; Kwanyama.
@item kk
Kazakh.
@item kl
Kalaallisut; Greenlandic.
@item km
Central Khmer.
@item kn
Kannada.
@item ko
Korean.
@item kr
Kanuri.
@item ks
Kashmiri.
@item ku
Kurdish.
@item kv
Komi.
@item kw
Cornish.
@item ky
Kirghiz; Kyrgyz.
@item la
Latin.
@item lb
Luxembourgish; Letzeburgesch.
@item lg
Ganda.
@item li
Limburgan; Limburger; Limburgish.
@item ln
Lingala.
@item lo
Lao.
@item lt
Lithuanian.
@item lu
Luba-Katanga.
@item lv
Latvian.
@item mg
Malagasy.
@item mh
Marshallese.
@item mi
Maori.
@item mk
Macedonian.
@item ml
Malayalam.
@item mn
Mongolian.
@item mr
Marathi.
@item ms
Malay.
@item mt
Maltese.
@item my
Burmese.
@item na
Nauru.
@item nb
Bokm@aa{}l, Norwegian; Norwegian Bokm@aa{}l.
@item nd
Ndebele, North; North Ndebele.
@item ne
Nepali.
@item ng
Ndonga.
@item nl
Dutch; Flemish.
@item nn
Norwegian Nynorsk; Nynorsk, Norwegian.
@item no
Norwegian.
@item nr
Ndebele, South; South Ndebele.
@item nv
Navajo; Navaho.
@item ny
Chichewa; Nyanja.
@item oc
Occitan (post 1500); Proven@,{c}al.
@item oj
Ojibwa.
@item om
Oromo.
@item or
Oriya.
@item os
Ossetian; Ossetic.
@item pa
Panjabi; Punjabi.
@item pi
Pali.
@item pl
Polish.
@item ps
Pushto; Pashto.
@item pt
Portuguese.
@item qu
Quechua.
@item rm
Romansh.
@item rn
Rundi.
@item ro
Romanian; Moldavian; Moldovan.
@item ru
Russian.
@item rw
Kinyarwanda.
@item sa
Sanskrit.
@item sc
Sardinian.
@item sd
Sindhi.
@item se
Northern Sami.
@item sg
Sango.
@item si
Sinhala; Sinhalese.
@item sk
Slovak.
@item sl
Slovenian.
@item sm
Samoan.
@item sn
Shona.
@item so
Somali.
@item sq
Albanian.
@item sr
Serbian.
@item ss
Swati.
@item st
Sotho, Southern.
@item su
Sundanese.
@item sv
Swedish.
@item sw
Swahili.
@item ta
Tamil.
@item te
Telugu.
@item tg
Tajik.
@item th
Thai.
@item ti
Tigrinya.
@item tk
Turkmen.
@item tl
Tagalog.
@item tn
Tswana.
@item to
Tonga (Tonga Islands).
@item tr
Turkish.
@item ts
Tsonga.
@item tt
Tatar.
@item tw
Twi.
@item ty
Tahitian.
@item ug
Uighur; Uyghur.
@item uk
Ukrainian.
@item ur
Urdu.
@item uz
Uzbek.
@item ve
Venda.
@item vi
Vietnamese.
@item vo
Volap@"{u}k.
@item wa
Walloon.
@item wo
Wolof.
@item xh
Xhosa.
@item yi
Yiddish.
@item yo
Yoruba.
@item za
Zhuang; Chuang.
@item zh
Chinese.
@item zu
Zulu.
