@item AD
Andorra.
@item AE
United Arab Emirates.
@item AF
Afghanistan.
@item AG
Antigua and Barbuda.
@item AI
Anguilla.
@item AL
Albania.
@item AM
Armenia.
@item AO
Angola.
@item AQ
Antarctica.
@item AR
Argentina.
@item AS
American Samoa.
@item AT
Austria.
@item AU
Australia.
@item AW
Aruba.
@item AX
Aaland Islands.
@item AZ
Azerbaijan.
@item BA
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
@item BB
Barbados.
@item BD
Bangladesh.
@item BE
Belgium.
@item BF
Burkina Faso.
@item BG
Bulgaria.
@item BH
Bahrain.
@item BI
Burundi.
@item BJ
Benin.
@item BL
Saint Barthelemy.
@item BM
Bermuda.
@item BN
Brunei Darussalam.
@item BO
Bolivia, Plurinational State of.
@item BQ
Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba.
@item BR
Brazil.
@item BS
Bahamas.
@item BT
Bhutan.
@item BV
Bouvet Island.
@item BW
Botswana.
@item BY
Belarus.
@item BZ
Belize.
@item CA
Canada.
@item CC
Cocos (Keeling) Islands.
@item CD
Congo, The Democratic Republic of the.
@item CF
Central African Republic.
@item CG
Congo.
@item CH
Switzerland.
@item CI
C@^{o}te d'Ivoire.
@item CK
Cook Islands.
@item CL
Chile.
@item CM
Cameroon.
@item CN
China.
@item CO
Colombia.
@item CR
Costa Rica.
@item CU
Cuba.
@item CV
Cape Verde.
@item CW
Curaçao.
@item CX
Christmas Island.
@item CY
Cyprus.
@item CZ
Czech Republic.
@item DE
Germany.
@item DJ
Djibouti.
@item DK
Denmark.
@item DM
Dominica.
@item DO
Dominican Republic.
@item DZ
Algeria.
@item EC
Ecuador.
@item EE
Estonia.
@item EG
Egypt.
@item EH
Western Sahara.
@item ER
Eritrea.
@item ES
Spain.
@item ET
Ethiopia.
@item FI
Finland.
@item FJ
Fiji.
@item FK
Falkland Islands (Malvinas).
@item FM
Micronesia, Federated States of.
@item FO
Faroe Islands.
@item FR
France.
@item GA
Gabon.
@item GB
United Kingdom.
@item GD
Grenada.
@item GE
Georgia.
@item GF
French Guiana.
@item GG
Guernsey.
@item GH
Ghana.
@item GI
Gibraltar.
@item GL
Greenland.
@item GM
Gambia.
@item GN
Guinea.
@item GP
Guadeloupe.
@item GQ
Equatorial Guinea.
@item GR
Greece.
@item GS
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands.
@item GT
Guatemala.
@item GU
Guam.
@item GW
Guinea-Bissau.
@item GY
Guyana.
@item HK
Hong Kong.
@item HM
Heard Island and McDonald Islands.
@item HN
Honduras.
@item HR
Croatia.
@item HT
Haiti.
@item HU
Hungary.
@item ID
Indonesia.
@item IE
Ireland.
@item IL
Israel.
@item IM
Isle of Man.
@item IN
India.
@item IO
British Indian Ocean Territory.
@item IQ
Iraq.
@item IR
Iran, Islamic Republic of.
@item IS
Iceland.
@item IT
Italy.
@item JE
Jersey.
@item JM
Jamaica.
@item JO
Jordan.
@item JP
Japan.
@item KE
Kenya.
@item KG
Kyrgyzstan.
@item KH
Cambodia.
@item KI
Kiribati.
@item KM
Comoros.
@item KN
Saint Kitts and Nevis.
@item KP
Korea, Democratic People's Republic of.
@item KR
Korea, Republic of.
@item KW
Kuwait.
@item KY
Cayman Islands.
@item KZ
Kazakhstan.
@item LA
Lao People's Democratic Republic.
@item LB
Lebanon.
@item LC
Saint Lucia.
@item LI
Liechtenstein.
@item LK
Sri Lanka.
@item LR
Liberia.
@item LS
Lesotho.
@item LT
Lithuania.
@item LU
Luxembourg.
@item LV
Latvia.
@item LY
Libya.
@item MA
Morocco.
@item MC
Monaco.
@item MD
Moldova, Republic of.
@item ME
Montenegro.
@item MF
Saint Martin (French part).
@item MG
Madagascar.
@item MH
Marshall Islands.
@item MK
North Macedonia.
@item ML
Mali.
@item MM
Myanmar.
@item MN
Mongolia.
@item MO
Macao.
@item MP
Northern Mariana Islands.
@item MQ
Martinique.
@item MR
Mauritania.
@item MS
Montserrat.
@item MT
Malta.
@item MU
Mauritius.
@item MV
Maldives.
@item MW
Malawi.
@item MX
Mexico.
@item MY
Malaysia.
@item MZ
Mozambique.
@item NA
Namibia.
@item NC
New Caledonia.
@item NE
Niger.
@item NF
Norfolk Island.
@item NG
Nigeria.
@item NI
Nicaragua.
@item NL
Netherlands.
@item NO
Norway.
@item NP
Nepal.
@item NR
Nauru.
@item NU
Niue.
@item NZ
New Zealand.
@item OM
Oman.
@item PA
Panama.
@item PE
Peru.
@item PF
French Polynesia.
@item PG
Papua New Guinea.
@item PH
Philippines.
@item PK
Pakistan.
@item PL
Poland.
@item PM
Saint Pierre and Miquelon.
@item PN
Pitcairn.
@item PR
Puerto Rico.
@item PS
Palestine, State of.
@item PT
Portugal.
@item PW
Palau.
@item PY
Paraguay.
@item QA
Qatar.
@item RE
Reunion.
@item RO
Romania.
@item RS
Serbia.
@item RU
Russian Federation.
@item RW
Rwanda.
@item SA
Saudi Arabia.
@item SB
Solomon Islands.
@item SC
Seychelles.
@item SD
Sudan.
@item SE
Sweden.
@item SG
Singapore.
@item SH
Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha.
@item SI
Slovenia.
@item SJ
Svalbard and Jan Mayen.
@item SK
Slovakia.
@item SL
Sierra Leone.
@item SM
San Marino.
@item SN
Senegal.
@item SO
Somalia.
@item SR
Suriname.
@item SS
South Sudan.
@item ST
Sao Tome and Principe.
@item SV
El Salvador.
@item SX
Sint Maarten (Dutch part).
@item SY
Syrian Arab Republic.
@item SZ
Swaziland.
@item TC
Turks and Caicos Islands.
@item TD
Chad.
@item TF
French Southern Territories.
@item TG
Togo.
@item TH
Thailand.
@item TJ
Tajikistan.
@item TK
Tokelau.
@item TL
Timor-Leste.
@item TM
Turkmenistan.
@item TN
Tunisia.
@item TO
Tonga.
@item TR
T@"{u}rkiye.
@item TT
Trinidad and Tobago.
@item TV
Tuvalu.
@item TW
Taiwan, Province of China.
@item TZ
Tanzania, United Republic of.
@item UA
Ukraine.
@item UG
Uganda.
@item UM
United States Minor Outlying Islands.
@item US
United States.
@item UY
Uruguay.
@item UZ
Uzbekistan.
@item VA
Holy See (Vatican City State).
@item VC
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
@item VE
Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of.
@item VG
Virgin Islands, British.
@item VI
Virgin Islands, U.S..
@item VN
Viet Nam.
@item VU
Vanuatu.
@item WF
Wallis and Futuna.
@item WS
Samoa.
@item YE
Yemen.
@item YT
Mayotte.
@item ZA
South Africa.
@item ZM
Zambia.
@item ZW
Zimbabwe.
