@c This file is part of the GNU gettext manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1995-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See the file gettext.texi for copying conditions.

@pindex xgettext
@cindex @code{xgettext} program, usage
@example
xgettext [@var{option}] [@var{inputfile}] @dots{}
@end example

The @code{xgettext} program extracts translatable strings from given
input files.

@subsection Input file location

@table @samp
@item @var{inputfile} @dots{}
Input files.

@item -f @var{file}
@itemx --files-from=@var{file}
@opindex -f@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --files-from@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Read the names of the input files from @var{file} instead of getting
them from the command line.

@item -D @var{directory}
@itemx --directory=@var{directory}
@opindex -D@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --directory@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Add @var{directory} to the list of directories.  Source files are
searched relative to this list of directories.  The resulting @file{.po}
file will be written relative to the current directory, though.

@end table

If @var{inputfile} is @samp{-}, standard input is read.

@subsection Output file location

@table @samp
@item -d @var{name}
@itemx --default-domain=@var{name}
@opindex -d@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --default-domain@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Use @file{@var{name}.po} for output (instead of @file{messages.po}).

@item -o @var{file}
@itemx --output=@var{file}
@opindex -o@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --output@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Write output to specified file (instead of @file{@var{name}.po} or
@file{messages.po}).

@item -p @var{dir}
@itemx --output-dir=@var{dir}
@opindex -p@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --output-dir@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Output files will be placed in directory @var{dir}.

@end table

@cindex output to stdout, @code{xgettext}
If the output @var{file} is @samp{-} or @samp{/dev/stdout}, the output
is written to standard output.

@subsection Choice of input file language

@table @samp
@item -L @var{name}
@itemx --language=@var{name}
@opindex -L@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --language@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@cindex supported languages, @code{xgettext}
Specifies the language of the input files.  The supported languages
are @code{C}, @code{C++}, @code{ObjectiveC}, @code{PO}, @code{Shell},
@code{Python}, @code{Lisp}, @code{EmacsLisp}, @code{librep}, @code{Scheme},
@code{Smalltalk}, @code{Java}, @code{JavaProperties}, @code{C#}, @code{awk},
@code{YCP}, @code{Tcl}, @code{Perl}, @code{PHP}, @code{Ruby},
@code{GCC-source}, @code{NXStringTable}, @code{RST}, @code{RSJ}, @code{Glade},
@code{Lua}, @code{JavaScript}, @code{Vala}, @code{GSettings}, @code{Desktop}.

@item -C
@itemx --c++
@opindex -C@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --c++@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
This is a shorthand for @code{--language=C++}.

@end table

By default the language is guessed depending on the input file name
extension.

@subsection Input file interpretation

@table @samp
@item --from-code=@var{name}
@opindex --from-code@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Specifies the encoding of the input files.  This option is needed only
if some untranslated message strings or their corresponding comments
contain non-ASCII characters.  Note that Tcl and Glade input files are
always assumed to be in UTF-8, regardless of this option.

@end table

By default the input files are assumed to be in ASCII.

@subsection Operation mode

@table @samp
@item -j
@itemx --join-existing
@opindex -j@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --join-existing@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Join messages with existing file.

@item -x @var{file}
@itemx --exclude-file=@var{file}
@opindex -x@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --exclude-file@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Entries from @var{file} are not extracted.  @var{file} should be a PO or
POT file.

@item -c[@var{tag}]
@itemx --add-comments[=@var{tag}]
@opindex -c@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --add-comments@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Place comment blocks starting with @var{tag} and preceding keyword lines
in the output file.  Without a @var{tag}, the option means to put @emph{all}
comment blocks preceding keyword lines in the output file.

Note that comment blocks are only extracted if there is no program code
between the comment and the string that gets extracted.
For example, in the following C source code:

@example
/* This is the first comment.  */
gettext ("foo");

/* This is the second comment: not extracted  */
gettext (
  "bar");

gettext (
  /* This is the third comment.  */
  "baz");

/* This is the fourth comment.  */

gettext ("I love blank lines in my programs");
@end example

@noindent
the second comment line will not be extracted, because there is a line
with some tokens between the comment line and the line that contains
the string.  But the fourth comment is extracted, because between it and
the line with the string there is merely a blank line.

@item --check[=@var{CHECK}]
@opindex --check@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@cindex supported syntax checks, @code{xgettext}
Perform a syntax check on msgid and msgid_plural.  The supported checks
are:

@table @samp
@item ellipsis-unicode
Prefer Unicode ellipsis character over ASCII @code{...}

@item space-ellipsis
Prohibit whitespace before an ellipsis character

@item quote-unicode
Prefer Unicode quotation marks over ASCII @code{"'`}

@item bullet-unicode
Prefer Unicode bullet character over ASCII @code{*} or @code{-}

@end table

The option has an effect on all input files.  To enable or disable
checks for a certain string, you can mark it with an @code{xgettext:}
special comment in the source file.  For example, if you specify the
@code{--check=space-ellipsis} option, but want to suppress the check on
a particular string, add the following comment:

@example
/* xgettext: no-space-ellipsis-check */
gettext ("We really want a space before ellipsis here ...");
@end example

The @code{xgettext:} comment can be followed by flags separated with a
comma.  The possible flags are of the form @samp{[no-]@var{name}-check},
where @var{name} is the name of a valid syntax check.  If a flag is
prefixed by @code{no-}, the meaning is negated.

Some tests apply the checks to each sentence within the msgid, rather
than the whole string.  xgettext detects the end of sentence by
performing a pattern match, which usually looks for a period followed by
a certain number of spaces.  The number is specified with the
@code{--sentence-end} option.

@item --sentence-end[=@var{TYPE}]
@opindex --sentence-end@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@cindex sentence end markers, @code{xgettext}
The supported values are:

@table @samp
@item single-space
Expect at least one whitespace after a period

@item double-space
Expect at least two whitespaces after a period

@end table

@end table

@subsection Language specific options

@table @samp
@item -a
@itemx --extract-all
@opindex -a@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --extract-all@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Extract all strings.

This option has an effect with most languages, namely C, C++, ObjectiveC,
Shell, Python, Lisp, EmacsLisp, librep, Java, C#, awk, Tcl, Perl, PHP,
GCC-source, Glade, Lua, JavaScript, Vala, GSettings.

@item -k[@var{keywordspec}]
@itemx --keyword[=@var{keywordspec}]
@opindex -k@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --keyword@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Specify @var{keywordspec} as an additional keyword to be looked for.
Without a @var{keywordspec}, the option means to not use default keywords.

@cindex adding keywords, @code{xgettext}
@cindex context, argument specification in @code{xgettext}
If @var{keywordspec} is a C identifier @var{id}, @code{xgettext} looks
for strings in the first argument of each call to the function or macro
@var{id}.  If @var{keywordspec} is of the form
@samp{@var{id}:@var{argnum}}, @code{xgettext} looks for strings in the
@var{argnum}th argument of the call.  If @var{keywordspec} is of the form
@samp{@var{id}:@var{argnum1},@var{argnum2}}, @code{xgettext} looks for
strings in the @var{argnum1}st argument and in the @var{argnum2}nd argument
of the call, and treats them as singular/plural variants for a message
with plural handling.  Also, if @var{keywordspec} is of the form
@samp{@var{id}:@var{contextargnum}c,@var{argnum}} or
@samp{@var{id}:@var{argnum},@var{contextargnum}c}, @code{xgettext} treats
strings in the @var{contextargnum}th argument as a context specifier.
And, as a special-purpose support for GNOME, if @var{keywordspec} is of the
form @samp{@var{id}:@var{argnum}g}, @code{xgettext} recognizes the
@var{argnum}th argument as a string with context, using the GNOME @code{glib}
syntax @samp{"msgctxt|msgid"}.
@*
Furthermore, if @var{keywordspec} is of the form
@samp{@var{id}:@dots{},@var{totalnumargs}t}, @code{xgettext} recognizes this
argument specification only if the number of actual arguments is equal to
@var{totalnumargs}.  This is useful for disambiguating overloaded function
calls in C++.
@*
Finally, if @var{keywordspec} is of the form
@samp{@var{id}:@var{argnum}...,"@var{xcomment}"}, @code{xgettext}, when
extracting a message from the specified argument strings, adds an extracted
comment @var{xcomment} to the message.  Note that when used through a normal
shell command line, the double-quotes around the @var{xcomment} need to be
escaped.

This option has an effect with most languages, namely C, C++, ObjectiveC,
Shell, Python, Lisp, EmacsLisp, librep, Java, C#, awk, Tcl, Perl, PHP,
GCC-source, Glade, Lua, JavaScript, Vala, GSettings, Desktop.

The default keyword specifications, which are always looked for if not
explicitly disabled, are language dependent.  They are:

@itemize
@item
For C, C++, and GCC-source: @code{gettext}, @code{dgettext:2},
@code{dcgettext:2}, @code{ngettext:1,2}, @code{dngettext:2,3},
@code{dcngettext:2,3}, @code{gettext_noop}, and @code{pgettext:1c,2},
@code{dpgettext:2c,3}, @code{dcpgettext:2c,3}, @code{npgettext:1c,2,3},
@code{dnpgettext:2c,3,4}, @code{dcnpgettext:2c,3,4}.

@item
For Objective C: Like for C, and also @code{NSLocalizedString}, @code{_},
@code{NSLocalizedStaticString}, @code{__}.

@item
For Shell scripts: @code{gettext}, @code{ngettext:1,2}, @code{eval_gettext},
@code{eval_ngettext:1,2}, @code{eval_pgettext:1c,2},
@code{eval_npgettext:1c,2,3}.

@item
For Python: @code{gettext}, @code{ugettext}, @code{dgettext:2},
@code{ngettext:1,2}, @code{ungettext:1,2}, @code{dngettext:2,3}, @code{_}.

@item
For Lisp: @code{gettext}, @code{ngettext:1,2}, @code{gettext-noop}.

@item
For EmacsLisp: @code{_}.

@item
For librep: @code{_}.

@item
For Scheme: @code{gettext}, @code{ngettext:1,2}, @code{gettext-noop}.

@item
For Java: @code{GettextResource.gettext:2},
@code{GettextResource.ngettext:2,3}, @code{GettextResource.pgettext:2c,3},
@code{GettextResource.npgettext:2c,3,4}, @code{gettext}, @code{ngettext:1,2},
@code{pgettext:1c,2}, @code{npgettext:1c,2,3}, @code{getString}.

@item
For C#: @code{GetString}, @code{GetPluralString:1,2},
@code{GetParticularString:1c,2}, @code{GetParticularPluralString:1c,2,3}.

@item
For awk: @code{dcgettext}, @code{dcngettext:1,2}.

@item
For Tcl: @code{::msgcat::mc}.

@item
For Perl: @code{gettext}, @code{%gettext}, @code{$gettext}, @code{dgettext:2},
@code{dcgettext:2}, @code{ngettext:1,2}, @code{dngettext:2,3},
@code{dcngettext:2,3}, @code{gettext_noop}.

@item
For PHP: @code{_}, @code{gettext}, @code{dgettext:2}, @code{dcgettext:2},
@code{ngettext:1,2}, @code{dngettext:2,3}, @code{dcngettext:2,3}.

@item
For Glade 1: @code{label}, @code{title}, @code{text}, @code{format},
@code{copyright}, @code{comments}, @code{preview_text}, @code{tooltip}.

@item
For Lua: @code{_}, @code{gettext.gettext}, @code{gettext.dgettext:2},
@code{gettext.dcgettext:2}, @code{gettext.ngettext:1,2},
@code{gettext.dngettext:2,3}, @code{gettext.dcngettext:2,3}.

@item
For JavaScript: @code{_}, @code{gettext}, @code{dgettext:2},
@code{dcgettext:2}, @code{ngettext:1,2}, @code{dngettext:2,3},
@code{pgettext:1c,2}, @code{dpgettext:2c,3}.

@item
For Vala: @code{_}, @code{Q_}, @code{N_}, @code{NC_}, @code{dgettext:2},
@code{dcgettext:2}, @code{ngettext:1,2}, @code{dngettext:2,3},
@code{dpgettext:2c,3}, @code{dpgettext2:2c,3}.

@item
For Desktop: @code{Name}, @code{GenericName}, @code{Comment},
@code{Keywords}.
@end itemize

To disable the default keyword specifications, the option @samp{-k} or
@samp{--keyword} or @samp{--keyword=}, without a @var{keywordspec}, can be
used.

@item --flag=@var{word}:@var{arg}:@var{flag}
@opindex --flag@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Specifies additional flags for strings occurring as part of the @var{arg}th
argument of the function @var{word}.  The possible flags are the possible
format string indicators, such as @samp{c-format}, and their negations,
such as @samp{no-c-format}, possibly prefixed with @samp{pass-}.
@*
@cindex function attribute, __format__
The meaning of @code{--flag=@var{function}:@var{arg}:@var{lang}-format}
is that in language @var{lang}, the specified @var{function} expects as
@var{arg}th argument a format string.  (For those of you familiar with
GCC function attributes, @code{--flag=@var{function}:@var{arg}:c-format} is
roughly equivalent to the declaration
@samp{__attribute__ ((__format__ (__printf__, @var{arg}, ...)))} attached
to @var{function} in a C source file.)
For example, if you use the @samp{error} function from GNU libc, you can
specify its behaviour through @code{--flag=error:3:c-format}.  The effect of
this specification is that @code{xgettext} will mark as format strings all
@code{gettext} invocations that occur as @var{arg}th argument of
@var{function}.
This is useful when such strings contain no format string directives:
together with the checks done by @samp{msgfmt -c} it will ensure that
translators cannot accidentally use format string directives that would
lead to a crash at runtime.
@*
@cindex function attribute, __format_arg__
The meaning of @code{--flag=@var{function}:@var{arg}:pass-@var{lang}-format}
is that in language @var{lang}, if the @var{function} call occurs in a
position that must yield a format string, then its @var{arg}th argument
must yield a format string of the same type as well.  (If you know GCC
function attributes, the @code{--flag=@var{function}:@var{arg}:pass-c-format}
option is roughly equivalent to the declaration
@samp{__attribute__ ((__format_arg__ (@var{arg})))} attached to @var{function}
in a C source file.)
For example, if you use the @samp{_} shortcut for the @code{gettext} function,
you should use @code{--flag=_:1:pass-c-format}.  The effect of this
specification is that @code{xgettext} will propagate a format string
requirement for a @code{_("string")} call to its first argument, the literal
@code{"string"}, and thus mark it as a format string.
This is useful when such strings contain no format string directives:
together with the checks done by @samp{msgfmt -c} it will ensure that
translators cannot accidentally use format string directives that would
lead to a crash at runtime.
@*
This option has an effect with most languages, namely C, C++, ObjectiveC,
Shell, Python, Lisp, EmacsLisp, librep, Scheme, Java, C#, awk, YCP, Tcl, Perl, PHP,
GCC-source, Lua, JavaScript, Vala.

@item -T
@itemx --trigraphs
@opindex -T@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --trigraphs@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@cindex C trigraphs
Understand ANSI C trigraphs for input.
@*
This option has an effect only with the languages C, C++, ObjectiveC.

@item --qt
@opindex --qt@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@cindex Qt format strings
Recognize Qt format strings.
@*
This option has an effect only with the language C++.

@item --kde
@opindex --kde@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@cindex KDE format strings
Recognize KDE 4 format strings.
@*
This option has an effect only with the language C++.

@item --boost
@opindex --boost@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@cindex Boost format strings
Recognize Boost format strings.
@*
This option has an effect only with the language C++.

@item --debug
@opindex --debug@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@cindex debugging messages marked as format strings
Use the flags @code{c-format} and @code{possible-c-format} to show who was
responsible for marking a message as a format string.  The latter form is
used if the @code{xgettext} program decided, the former form is used if
the programmer prescribed it.

By default only the @code{c-format} form is used.  The translator should
not have to care about these details.

@end table

This implementation of @code{xgettext} is able to process a few awkward
cases, like strings in preprocessor macros, ANSI concatenation of
adjacent strings, and escaped end of lines for continued strings.

@subsection Output details

@c --no-escape and --escape omitted on purpose.  They are not useful.

@table @samp
@item --color
@itemx --color=@var{when}
@opindex --color@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Specify whether or when to use colors and other text attributes.
See @ref{The --color option} for details.

@item --style=@var{style_file}
@opindex --style@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Specify the CSS style rule file to use for @code{--color}.
See @ref{The --style option} for details.

@item --force-po
@opindex --force-po@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Always write an output file even if no message is defined.

@item -i
@itemx --indent
@opindex -i@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --indent@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Write the .po file using indented style.

@item --no-location
@opindex --no-location@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Do not write @samp{#: @var{filename}:@var{line}} lines.  Note that using
this option makes it harder for technically skilled translators to understand
each message's context.

@item -n
@itemx --add-location=@var{type}
@opindex -n@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --add-location@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Generate @samp{#: @var{filename}:@var{line}} lines (default).

The optional @var{type} can be either @samp{full}, @samp{file}, or
@samp{never}.  If it is not given or @samp{full}, it generates the
lines with both file name and line number.  If it is @samp{file}, the
line number part is omitted.  If it is @samp{never}, it completely
suppresses the lines (same as @code{--no-location}).

@item --strict
@opindex --strict@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Write out a strict Uniforum conforming PO file.  Note that this
Uniforum format should be avoided because it doesn't support the
GNU extensions.

@item --properties-output
@opindex --properties-output@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Write out a Java ResourceBundle in Java @code{.properties} syntax.  Note
that this file format doesn't support plural forms and silently drops
obsolete messages.

@item --stringtable-output
@opindex --stringtable-output@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Write out a NeXTstep/GNUstep localized resource file in @code{.strings} syntax.
Note that this file format doesn't support plural forms.

@item --its=@var{file}
@opindex --its@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Use ITS rules defined in @var{file}.
Note that this is only effective with XML files.

@item --itstool
@opindex --itstool@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Write out comments recognized by itstool (@uref{http://itstool.org}).
Note that this is only effective with XML files.

@item -w @var{number}
@itemx --width=@var{number}
@opindex -w@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --width@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Set the output page width.  Long strings in the output files will be
split across multiple lines in order to ensure that each line's width
(= number of screen columns) is less or equal to the given @var{number}.

@item --no-wrap
@opindex --no-wrap@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Do not break long message lines.  Message lines whose width exceeds the
output page width will not be split into several lines.  Only file reference
lines which are wider than the output page width will be split.

@item -s
@itemx --sort-output
@opindex -s@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --sort-output@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@cindex sorting output of @code{xgettext}
Generate sorted output (deprecated).  Note that using this option makes it
much harder for the translator to understand each message's context.

@item -F
@itemx --sort-by-file
@opindex -F@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --sort-by-file@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Sort output by file location.

@item --omit-header
@opindex --omit-header@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Don't write header with @samp{msgid ""} entry.

@cindex testing @file{.po} files for equivalence
This is useful for testing purposes because it eliminates a source
of variance for generated @code{.gmo} files.  With @code{--omit-header},
two invocations of @code{xgettext} on the same files with the same
options at different times are guaranteed to produce the same results.

Note that using this option will lead to an error if the resulting file
would not entirely be in ASCII.

@item --copyright-holder=@var{string}
@opindex --copyright-holder@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Set the copyright holder in the output.  @var{string} should be the
copyright holder of the surrounding package.  (Note that the msgstr
strings, extracted from the package's sources, belong to the copyright
holder of the package.)  Translators are expected to transfer or disclaim
the copyright for their translations, so that package maintainers can
distribute them without legal risk.  If @var{string} is empty, the output
files are marked as being in the public domain; in this case, the translators
are expected to disclaim their copyright, again so that package maintainers
can distribute them without legal risk.

The default value for @var{string} is the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
simply because @code{xgettext} was first used in the GNU project.

@item --foreign-user
@opindex --foreign-user@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Omit FSF copyright in output.  This option is equivalent to
@samp{--copyright-holder=''}.  It can be useful for packages outside the GNU
project that want their translations to be in the public domain.

@item --package-name=@var{package}
@opindex --package-name@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Set the package name in the header of the output.

@item --package-version=@var{version}
@opindex --package-version@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Set the package version in the header of the output.  This option has an
effect only if the @samp{--package-name} option is also used.

@item --msgid-bugs-address=@var{email@@address}
@opindex --msgid-bugs-address@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Set the reporting address for msgid bugs.  This is the email address or URL
to which the translators shall report bugs in the untranslated strings:

@itemize -
@item Strings which are not entire sentences; see the maintainer guidelines
in @ref{Preparing Strings}.
@item Strings which use unclear terms or require additional context to be
understood.
@item Strings which make invalid assumptions about notation of date, time or
money.
@item Pluralisation problems.
@item Incorrect English spelling.
@item Incorrect formatting.
@end itemize

It can be your email address, or a mailing list address where translators
can write to without being subscribed, or the URL of a web page through
which the translators can contact you.

The default value is empty, which means that translators will be clueless!
Don't forget to specify this option.

@item -m[@var{string}]
@itemx --msgstr-prefix[=@var{string}]
@opindex -m@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --msgstr-prefix@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Use @var{string} (or "" if not specified) as prefix for msgstr values.

@item -M[@var{string}]
@itemx --msgstr-suffix[=@var{string}]
@opindex -M@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --msgstr-suffix@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Use @var{string} (or "" if not specified) as suffix for msgstr values.

@end table

@subsection Informative output

@table @samp
@item -h
@itemx --help
@opindex -h@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --help@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Display this help and exit.

@item -V
@itemx --version
@opindex -V@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --version@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Output version information and exit.

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
@opindex -v@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
@opindex --verbose@r{, @code{xgettext} option}
Increase verbosity level.

@end table
