@c -*- texinfo -*-
@chapter Announcement

@include version.texi

The GNUstep Makefile Package version @value{GNUSTEP-MAKE-VERSION} is now available.

@section What is the GNUstep Makefile Package?

The makefile package is a simple, powerful and extensible way to
write makefiles for a GNUstep-based project.  It allows the user to
write a project without having to deal with the complex issues
associated with configuration, building, installation, and packaging.
It also allows the user to easily create cross-compiled binaries.

@set ANNOUNCE-ONLY
@include news.texi
@clear ANNOUNCE-ONLY

@section Obtaining gnustep-make

You can get the gnustep-make-@value{GNUSTEP-MAKE-VERSION}.tar.gz
distribution file at @url{ftp://ftp.gnustep.org/pub/gnustep/core}

It is accompanied by gnustep-make-@value{GNUSTEP-MAKE-VERSION}.tar.gz.sig, a
PGP signature which you can validate by putting both files in the same
directory and using:

@example
gpg --verify gnustep-make-@value{GNUSTEP-MAKE-VERSION}.tar.gz.sig
@end example

Signature has been created using the key with the following fingerprint:

@example
83AA E47C E829 A414 6EF8  3420 CA86 8D4C 9914 9679
@end example

Read the INSTALL file or the GNUstep-HOWTO for installation instructions.

@section Where do I send bug reports?

Please log bug reports on the GNUstep project page
@url{http://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?group=gnustep} or send bug
reports to @email{bug-gnustep@@gnu.org}.

@section Obtaining GNUstep Software

Check out the GNUstep web site. (@url{http://www.gnustep.org/}) and the
GNU web site. (@url{http://www.gnu.org/})
