\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c A FAQ for GNUstep

@node Top, Compatibility, (dir), (dir)
@chapter GNUstep Frequently Asked Questions with Answers

Last updated @today{}.
Please send corrections to @email{gnustep-maintainer@@gnu.org}. Also look
at the user FAQ for more user oriented questions.

@menu
* Compatibility::               
* Compiling and Developing::    
* GNU Objective C Compiler and Runtime::  
* GNUstep Base Library::        
* GNUstep GUI Library::         
* GNUstep DisplayGhostScript Server::  
@end menu

@c ****************************************************************
@c Compiling
@node Compatibility, Compiling and Developing, Top, Top
@section Compatibility

@menu
* Is it easy to port OPENSTEP programs to GNUstep?::  
* How about porting between Cocoa and GNUstep?::  
* Tools for porting::           
* Can I transfer archived data from GNUstep to Cocoa?::  
* Does distributed objects work between GNUstep and Cocoa?::  
* Is there an Interface Builder for GNUstep?::  
* Can I use my original NIB files?::  
* Can one use the hybrid "Objective-C++"::  
* Is there a plan to support Java/YellowBox Bindings?::  
* What if I compile GNUstep under OPENSTEP/MacOS X?::  
* Is the Objective C API for GTK related?::  
* How about implementing parts of the Application Kit with GTK?::  
@end menu

@node Is it easy to port OPENSTEP programs to GNUstep?, How about porting between Cocoa and GNUstep?, Compatibility, Compatibility
@subsection Is it easy to port OPENSTEP programs to GNUstep?

It is probably easy for simple programs. There are some portability
tools to make this easier, or rewrite
the Makefiles yourself.  You will also have to translate the NIB files
(if there are any) to GNUstep model files using the nib2gmodel program
(from @url{ftp://ftp.gnustep.org/pub/gnustep/dev-apps}).

@node How about porting between Cocoa and GNUstep?, Tools for porting, Is it easy to port OPENSTEP programs to GNUstep?, Compatibility
@subsection How about porting between Cocoa and GNUstep?

It's easier from GNUstep to Cocoa than Cocoa to GNUstep. Cocoa is
constantly changing, much faster than GNUstep could hope to keep
up. They have added extensions and new classes that aren't available in
GNUstep yet. Plus there are some other issues. If you start with
Cocoa:

@itemize @bullet
@item Use #ifndef GNUSTEP for Apple only code.
@item Do not use CoreFoundation
@item Do not use Objective-C++ (except with gcc 4.1 or later)
@item Do not use Quicktime or other proprietary extension
@item GNUstep should be able to read Cocoa nib files automatically, so there
is no need to port these, although you might want to have GNUstep specific
versions of them anyway.
@end itemize

See also @url{http://mediawiki.gnustep.org/index.php/Writing_portable_code}
for more information.

@node Tools for porting, Can I transfer archived data from GNUstep to Cocoa?, How about porting between Cocoa and GNUstep?, Compatibility
@subsection Tools for porting

While the programming interface should be almost transparent between
systems (expect for the unimplemented parts, of course), there are a
variety of other files and tools that are necessary for porting
programs.

@table @samp
@item nib2gmodel
This program coverts nib files from any system, such as OPENSTEP to
a gmodel format file. Gmodel can be read directly by GNUstep or you can
convert this to a more GNUstep-native gorm format (using the Gorm interface
modeller). Note this is not necessary for Cocoa nibs - GNUstep can read these
directly.

@item Renaissance
GNUstep Renaissance allows you to describe your user
interfaces (that is, the windows in your application, and the buttons,
boxes, textfields, etc in the windows) in simple and intuitive XML
files, using an open, standard format describing the logic of the
interface.  It has a number of advantages over the proprietary nib format:
portability, open standard, easy localization, themeability, and 
intelligent autolayout.

@item Gorm
The equivalent of the Interface Builder in GNUstep. It might be easier to
just recreate the interface using Gorm rather than dealing with 
translations.

@item OpenStep2GNUConverter and nfmake
Two programs that allow you to convert PB files to GNUstep makefiles or
compile a program on GNUstep directly from PB files. They probably work
only for OPENSTEP systems and are a little out-of-date.

@item StepTalk
A portable scripting environment that lets your do scripting in almost
any language you like.

@end table

@node Can I transfer archived data from GNUstep to Cocoa?, Does distributed objects work between GNUstep and Cocoa?, Tools for porting, Compatibility
@subsection Can I transfer archived data from GNUstep to Cocoa?

Apple's archiving format is proprietary and not documented, so this
poses a problem for anyone wanting to implement compatibility with it.
However, even if we reverse engineered the format, there are enough
differences between the class and ivar layouts to make this sort of
compatibility difficult. Not to mention the fact that we would
constantly have to keep up with the changes Apple made. 

The new keyed archiving using XML file formats is much more portable,
and GNUstep is trying to maintain compatibility with Apple with this
type of archiving.

@node Does distributed objects work between GNUstep and Cocoa?, Is there an Interface Builder for GNUstep?, Can I transfer archived data from GNUstep to Cocoa?, Compatibility
@subsection Does distributed objects work between GNUstep and Cocoa?

See the answer to the previous question (on archive compatibility) for
why this won't work either.

@node Is there an Interface Builder for GNUstep?, Can I use my original NIB files?, Does distributed objects work between GNUstep and Cocoa?, Compatibility
@subsection Is there an Interface Builder for GNUstep?

There is an Interface Builder for GNUstep called Gorm. A lot of work
has been put into it and it works very well.  You can download it from
the ftp site or via http.  The Project Manager ProjectCenter is also
available.

@node Can I use my original NIB files?, Can one use the hybrid "Objective-C++", Is there an Interface Builder for GNUstep?, Compatibility
@subsection  Can I use my original NIB files?

 No - NeXT/Apple never documented their nib format, so GNUstep supports
both the 'gmodel' format (which stores information as text
(property-lists) and can therefore be edited 'by hand') and binary
archive format (which can be edited by Gorm).  There IS a conversion
tool called nib2gmodel that can be compiled under OPENSTEP to convert
nib files to GNUstep gmodel files.

The current version of gui supports reading nib files created as of 10.2. 
If you have nib files which are older than this, you can convert them by
loading them into Interface Builder, going to the "file" second and saving 
the nib using the "10.2 or later format."

@node Can one use the hybrid "Objective-C++", Is there a plan to support Java/YellowBox Bindings?, Can I use my original NIB files?, Compatibility
@subsection  Can one use the hybrid "Objective-C++"

Yes gcc 4.1 has support for this.

@node Is there a plan to support Java/YellowBox Bindings?, What if I compile GNUstep under OPENSTEP/MacOS X?, Can one use the hybrid "Objective-C++", Compatibility
@subsection  Is there a plan to support the Java/YellowBox Bindings?

Yes. The GNUstep Java library/bridge called JIGS is available now.  JIGS
is a free (LGPL) Java Interface for GNUstep; it can automatically wrap
Objective-C libraries based on GNUstep, making them accessible directly
to the Java programmer as if they were Java libraries. As a side effect,
it is also possible to use the whole engine in the reverse way: JIGS
provides a high level API to allow Objective-C programmers to start java
virtual machines inside GNUstep Objective-C code and access java objects
in the java virtual machine transparently, as if they were objective-C
objects.

@node What if I compile GNUstep under OPENSTEP/MacOS X?, Is the Objective C API for GTK related?, Is there a plan to support Java/YellowBox Bindings?, Compatibility
@subsection  What if I compile GNUstep under OPENSTEP/MacOS X?

GNUstep uses different backends to provide the same functionality as 
Display Postscript.  While someone could write a backend library to 
provide the interface, nobody has bothered to date.

   You can, however, use a GNUstep program with an X11 server running
on MacOSX.

@node Is the Objective C API for GTK related?, How about implementing parts of the Application Kit with GTK?, What if I compile GNUstep under OPENSTEP/MacOS X?, Compatibility
@subsection  Is the Objective C API for GTK related?

  No.  GNUstep applications provide their GUI via the OpenStep
API, which provides fully object-oriented access to GUI manipulation.

  The object-oriented nature of the libraries and language make it much easier
for new users to create their own subclasses rather than simply using the
supplied widgets as in other frameworks.

@node How about implementing parts of the Application Kit with GTK?,  , Is the Objective C API for GTK related?, Compatibility
@subsection  How about implementing parts of the Application Kit with GTK?

  Yes and No - The GNUstep architecture provides a single,
platform-independent, API for handling all aspects of GUI interaction
(implemented in the gstep-gui library), with a backend architecture
that permits you to have different display models (display postscript,
X-windows, win32, berlin ...) while letting you use the same code
for printing as for displaying. Use of GTK in the frontend gui
library would remove some of those advantages without adding any.

That being said, a backend library could be implemented using gtk
if anyone wanted to do so.  Since the frontend library handles most
of the work involved in implementing the OpenStep API, the backend
is a relatively thin layer and the advantages of GTK over direct
xlib or win32 calls is likely to be minimal.  If/when GTK is ported
to more systems, a backend written using it could be a valuable
asset - volunteers are, as always, welcome.


@c ****************************************************************
@c Compiling
@node Compiling and Developing, GNU Objective C Compiler and Runtime, Compatibility, Top
@section Compiling and Developing

@menu
* How can I get started programming?::  
* How can I help with GNUstep?::  
* Helping develop GNUstep::     
* Helping document GNUstep::    
* How do I assign my contribution?::  
* How do I update the task list?::  
* How do I start writing tests?::  
* How do I start writing applications?::  
* How can I help with the GNUstep website?::  
* Why doesn't GDB support Objective-C?::  
@end menu

@node How can I get started programming?, How can I help with GNUstep?, Compiling and Developing, Compiling and Developing
@subsection  How can I get started programming?

  Good question.  Read the tutorials at the GNUstep web site. Also look at
Apple's documentation (pointers in the Resources section on the GNUstep web
site.)

@node How can I help with GNUstep?, Helping develop GNUstep, How can I get started programming?, Compiling and Developing
@subsection  How can I help with GNUstep?

@enumerate
@item Write/debug library code 
@item Write documentation 
@item Update the task list and library headers 
@item Write applications
@end enumerate

Let people know what you are doing.  Break your project up into
the smallest units you can.  Feed back frequent updates to the
maintainers.  Ask questions in the discussion mailing list.

Do remember that any changes beyond a few lines of code (or
documentation) require a disclaimer or copyright assignment to the
Free Software Foundation before they can be incorporated into the
project.  Get in touch with the GNUstep maintainer about this.

Don't start with large-scale reorganization of anything - instead,
get a general idea in mind of what you want to do, and proceed as
much as possible with incremental changes that don't break anything
- that way you can make those incremental changes available to the
rest of the community at frequent intervals.

Don't be afraid to give up - there is no shame in finding out that
you have take on too large/complex a project.  It's much better to
'resign' and take on a smaller job than to just stop without telling
anyone.

Please document the code you add or change (using autogsdoc comments
that begin with a slash and two asterices). But PLEASE, do not copy from
the Apple documentation or any other copyrighted documentation.


@node Helping develop GNUstep, Helping document GNUstep, How can I help with GNUstep?, Compiling and Developing
@subsection  Helping develop GNUstep

There is plenty of unimplemented stuff in the gui library and
backend libraries that volunteers can work on - just browse through
the code and see if it conforms to the documentation.

Specific tasks are noted in the developers section on the GNUstep
website.

Once you have coded something, you could always write a testcase
and documentation for it :-)

@node Helping document GNUstep, How do I assign my contribution?, Helping develop GNUstep, Compiling and Developing
@subsection  Helping document GNUstep

All class documentation is written directly in the source code itself
and translated using the autogsdoc program. See the source code and
documentation for autogsdoc for information on documenting the classes.

Newcomers could write documentation for individual classes by
comparing the OpenStep specification, the MacOS-X documentation,
and the GNUstep source.  Documentation should clearly note where
individual methods are specific to OpenStep, MacOS-X or are GNustep
extensions.

More experienced people could write documentation on general
programming topics, and tutorials for new users.

Anyone willing to write documentation, either tutorials for using
GNUstep, or reference documentation for individual classes, should
either write it in gsdoc or as plain ascii text for someone else to
format into gsdoc.

GNUstep documentation should have copyright assigned to the Free
Software Foundation.

@node How do I assign my contribution?, How do I update the task list?, Helping document GNUstep, Compiling and Developing
@subsection How do I assign my contribution?

Everyone who contributes more than 20 lines of code or so needs to
sign a copyright assignment so that the FSF can have legal control of
the copyright. This makes it easier to defend against any copyright
infringement suits.  Contact the GNUstep maintainer for instructions
on how to do this or download and fill out the form
@url{http://www.gnustep.org/resources/request-assign.future}
(instructions are included).


@node How do I update the task list?, How do I start writing tests?, How do I assign my contribution?, Compiling and Developing
@subsection  How do I update the task list?

 The task list (@url{http://savannah.gnu.org/pm/?group_id=99}) is 
supposed to tell people what jobs are waiting to be done. Feel free to
add to it or update the tasks that are there (you need to create a login
for yourself first).

One job of major importance that pretty much anyone can do is to
look for jobs to add to the task list.  In the case of methods from
the OpenStep specification or the MacOS-X documentation not being
present in the GNUstep libraries, it is also helpful to add the
method prototypes to the library header files.

Send any changes or additions to @email{bug-gnustep@@gnu.org}.

A beginner can look through the MacOS-X documentation, the OpenStep
specification and the GNUstep source and contribute task items.

If a class or method is in MacOS-X and OpenStep but is not in
GNUstep - it's a high priority TODO and should at least be added
to the GNUstep headers and a dummy version added to the source with
a FIXME comment.

If a class or method is in MacOS-X but not OpenStep or GNUstep -
it's a low priority TODO.  It should be added to the GNUstep headers
bracketed in @code{#ifndef STRICT_OPENSTEP}

If a class or method is in OpenStep but not in MacOS-X or GNUstep
- it's a low priority TODO.  It should be added to the GNUstep
headers bracketed in @code{#ifndef STRICT_MACOS_X}

There are a couple of people working on this already, so it's a
good idea to get in touch with Greg, Adam or Richard to coordinate efforts.

@node How do I start writing tests?, How do I start writing applications?, How do I update the task list?, Compiling and Developing
@subsection  How do I start writing tests?

 You can write testcases - where the libraries fail tests, you
could either fix the problem, or add it to the task list.

To write testcases, you need to use svn to install the latest
GNUstep sourcecode you can find. Then checkout the
'gnustep/tools/testsuite' module from svn.

@node How do I start writing applications?, How can I help with the GNUstep website?, How do I start writing tests?, Compiling and Developing
@subsection  How do I start writing applications?

 You can either look at the links on the GNUstep website for
applications that have been started, and email their owners to
volunteer to help, or you can start your own project.

@node How can I help with the GNUstep website?, Why doesn't GDB support Objective-C?, How do I start writing applications?, Compiling and Developing
@subsection  How can I help with the GNUstep website?

Talk to Adam Fedor @email{fedor@@gnu.org}, the maintainer.

The GNUstep website is kept as a CVS module, but the largest portions
of it (the FAQ and the Documentation) are actually
generated from files in the individual GNUstep packages.
Many highly changeable portions are kept on the Wiki, so anyone can change
these (first you need to get write access, though).

If you want to update the FAQ or documentation  - grab
the latest snapshot of the GNUstep core you can find, update it
from the svn repository, and work with the contents of the appropriate
documentation directory.

If you want to work on other parts of the website, you can grab a copy
of the website via anonymous CVS. See
@url{http://savannah.gnu.org/cvs/?group_id=99} for instructions on how
to do that.

The main task with the website is to figure out which bits are
out-of-date (or wrong) and update/mark-as-outdated as required.

@node Why doesn't GDB support Objective-C?,  , How can I help with the GNUstep website?, Compiling and Developing
@subsection Why doesn't GDB support Objective-C?

As of GDB 6.0, gdb supports debugging of Objective-C code.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------

@node GNU Objective C Compiler and Runtime, GNUstep Base Library, Compiling and Developing, Top
@section GNU Objective C Compiler and Runtime

@menu
* What is the Objective C Runtime?::  
@end menu

@node What is the Objective C Runtime?,  , GNU Objective C Compiler and Runtime, GNU Objective C Compiler and Runtime
@subsection What is the Objective C Runtime?

The Objective C Runtime Library provides C functions and data structures
required to execute an Objective C program. 

The GNU Objective C Runtime Library offers everything NeXT's runtime
does, including Categories, Protocols, @samp{+poseAs:}, thread-safety,
class initialization on demand, delayed loading of classes, and
initialization of static instances (such as @@""-style string objects). 

It also has several differences over NeXT's implementation:

@itemize @bullet

@item GNU's runtime provides ``selector-types'' along with each
selector; NeXT's does not.  A selector-type is a string that describes
the C variable types for the method's return and argument values.  Among
other uses, selector-types is extremely helpful for fast distributed
objects implementations, (see GNUstep Base Library Section, below).

@item Many of the GNU functions have different names than their
corresponding NeXT functions; the GNU names conform to the GNU coding
standards. The GNUstep base library contains a compatibility header that
works with both runtimes. You should use functions there or use OpenStep
Foundation methods/functions instead of the basic
runtime functions so that you code can run with either system.

Apple has recently added new functionality to their runtime, including
built-in exception handling, etc. Hopefully these will be ported to the
GNU runtime in the future.

@end itemize

@c ------------- GNU Compiler and Objective C Runtime Library -------

@node GNUstep Base Library, GNUstep GUI Library, GNU Objective C Compiler and Runtime, Top
@section GNUstep Base Library

@menu
* What is the GNUstep Base Library?::  
* What is base's current state of development?::  
* What are the features of GNU Distributed Objects?::  
@end menu

@node What is the GNUstep Base Library?, What is base's current state of development?, GNUstep Base Library, GNUstep Base Library
@subsection What is the GNUstep Base Library?

The GNUstep Base Library is a library of general-purpose, non-graphical
Objective C objects.  For example, it includes classes for strings,
object collections, byte streams, typed coders, invocations,
notifications, notification dispatchers, moments in time, network ports,
remote object messaging support (distributed objects), and event loops.

It provides functionality that aims to implement the non-graphical
portion of the OpenStep standard (the Foundation library).  

@node What is base's current state of development?, What are the features of GNU Distributed Objects?, What is the GNUstep Base Library?, GNUstep Base Library
@subsection What is its current state of development?

GNUstep base is currently stable and, to the best of our knowledge,
implements all of the OpenStep functionality (except for a few classes
that we feel are not useful). It also implements most all of the new
Cocoa classes. However we do some things, like scripting, differently,
so we don't implement all the Cocoa classes.

@node What are the features of GNU Distributed Objects?,  , What is base's current state of development?, GNUstep Base Library
@subsection What are the features of GNU Distributed Objects?

GNU Distributed Objects has many of the features of other distributed
objects implementations, but, since it is free software, it can be
ported to platforms for which other distributed objects implementations
are not available.

[ NOTE: The GNU distributed object facilities have the same ease-of-use
as Apple's; be warned, however, that they are not compatible with each
other.  They have different class hierarchies, different instance
variables, different method names, different implementation strategies
and different network message formats.  You cannot communicate with a
Apple NSConnection using a GNU NSConnection.  

Here are some differences between GNU distributed objects and Apple's
distributed objects: Apple NSDistantObject asks it's remote
target for the method encoding types and caches the results; GNU
NSDistantObject gets the types directly from the local GNU "typed selector"
mechanism if the information is known locally and only queries the remote
target or caching encoding types when using a method that is not known to
the local process.  The NSProxy for the remote root object always has name
and, once set, you cannot change the root object of a NSConnection; the GNU
Proxy for the remote root object has a target address value just like
all other Proxy's, and you can change the root object as many times as
you like. ].

@c --------------------------GNUstep Base Library----------------------

@node GNUstep GUI Library, GNUstep DisplayGhostScript Server, GNUstep Base Library, Top
@section GNUstep GUI Library

@menu
* What is the GUI Library?::    
* Explain the organization of the front- and back-ends::  
* What is the current state of development of the front-end?::  
* What is the current state of development of the back-ends?::  
@end menu

@node What is the GUI Library?, Explain the organization of the front- and back-ends, GNUstep GUI Library, GNUstep GUI Library
@subsection What is the GUI Library?

The GNUstep GUI Library is a library of objects useful for writing
graphical applications.  For example, it includes classes for drawing
and manipulating graphics objects on the screen: windows, menus,
buttons, sliders, text fields, and events.  There are also many
peripheral classes that offer operating-system-independent interfaces to
images, cursors, colors, fonts, pasteboards, printing.  There are also
workspace support classes such as data links, open/save panels,
context-dependent help, spell checking.

It provides functionality that aims to implement the @samp{AppKit}
portion of the OpenStep standard.  However the implementation has
been written to take advantage of GNUstep enhancements wherever possible.


@node Explain the organization of the front- and back-ends, What is the current state of development of the front-end?, What is the GUI Library?, GNUstep GUI Library
@subsection Explain the organization of the front- and back-ends

The GNUstep GUI Library is divided into a front- and back-end.  The
front-end contains the majority of implementation, but leaves out the
low-level drawing and event code.  A back-end can override whatever
methods necessary in order to implement low-level drawing event
receiving.  Different back-ends will make GNUstep available on various
platforms.  The default GNU back-end will run on top of X Windows.
Other back-ends could allow GNUstep to run on OpenGL and WIN32
graphics/event platforms.  Much work will be saved by this clean
separation between front- and back-end, because it allows different
platforms to share the large amount of front-end code.

@node What is the current state of development of the front-end?, What is the current state of development of the back-ends?, Explain the organization of the front- and back-ends, GNUstep GUI Library
@subsection What is the current state of development of the front-end?

Many of the classes are well implemented, if not thoroughly tested.
See the GNUstep web sites and read status information contained in the
distribution for the most up-to-date information.

@node What is the current state of development of the back-ends?,  , What is the current state of development of the front-end?, GNUstep GUI Library
@subsection What is the current state of development of the back-ends?

There are several backends currently available:

@table @samp
@item xlib
This backend runs on X11 and uses standard xlib
calls for implementing drawing. It works well, but is limited in many
areas due to the limitations of xlib drawing.
@item art
This is a very good backend that draws using the libart package and
freetype with near PostScript quality and functionality. It is currently
the standard backend (as long as the required libraries are installed). 
@item w32
This backend works on Windows and uses basic Windows drawing
@item cairo
An up-and-coming backend. It still relies on unpublished functions in
the cairo library so using it is not for the beginner.
@end table

@c ------------------------- GNUstep GUI Library -----------------------

@node GNUstep DisplayGhostScript Server,  , GNUstep GUI Library, Top
@section GNUstep DisplayGhostScript Server

@menu
* What is the Display Ghostscript Server?::  
* What is DGSs current state of development?::  
* What is the relationship between the Display Ghostscript Server and X Windows?::  
@end menu

@node What is the Display Ghostscript Server?, What is DGSs current state of development?, GNUstep DisplayGhostScript Server, GNUstep DisplayGhostScript Server
@subsection What is the Display Ghostscript Server?

It is a free implementation of a Display PostScript server based on the
GNU Ghostscript program developed by Aladdin Enterprises and now owned by artofcode LLC.

At one point, GNUstep was using this for display purposes. However the
development of DGS has stopped as it is too difficult to maintain and
no one wanted to work on it. Now we are using other means of drawing.

@node What is DGSs current state of development?, What is the relationship between the Display Ghostscript Server and X Windows?, What is the Display Ghostscript Server?, GNUstep DisplayGhostScript Server
@subsection What is its current state of development?

GNU contracted with Aladdin Enterprises to add some key features to GNU
Ghostscript so it could be used as a DPS server. This work has mostly
been done, although Aladdin did not completely finish the work that they
were contracted for.  (Because the work took longer than specified and
was not completed, Aladdin agreed to waive approximately $10,000 in
promised fees for the work that was actually done and delivered.)  DGS
works fairly well with a single context.  Alpha channel and compositing
doesn't work.

Currently, further development on DGS has been abandoned.  The library
based approach using libart, cairo, etc works much better.

@node What is the relationship between the Display Ghostscript Server and X Windows?,  , What is DGSs current state of development?, GNUstep DisplayGhostScript Server
@subsection What is the relationship between the Display Ghostscript Server and X Windows?

Display Ghostscript runs on top of X Windows.

@c ------------------ GNUstep DisplayGhostScript Server ---------------

@bye
\bye
