@c -*- texinfo -*-
@chapter Announcement
@ifset TEXT-ONLY
@include version.texi
@end ifset

This is version @value{GNUSTEP-BACK-VERSION} of the GNUstep GUI Backend
(@samp{gnustep-back}).

@section What is the GNUstep GUI Backend?

It is a back-end component for the GNUstep GUI Library.  The
implementation of the GNUstep GUI Library is designed in two parts.  The
first part is the front-end component which is independent of platform
and display system.  This front-end is combined with a back-end
component which handles all of the display system dependent such as
specific calls to the X Window System.  This design allows the GNUstep
applications to have the "look and feel" of the underlying display
system without any changes to the application, and the library can be
easily ported to other display systems.

The GNUstep GUI Backend is for platforms using the X-Window System or
Window's Systems. It works via a DPS emulation engine to
emulate the DPS functions required by the front-end system.

@set ANNOUNCE-ONLY
@include news.texi
@clear ANNOUNCE-ONLY

@section Where can you get it?  How can you compile it?

@ifset GNUSTEP-BACK-FTP-MACHINE
The gnustep-back-@value{GNUSTEP-BACK-VERSION}.tar.gz distribution
file has been placed at @url{ftp://@value{GNUSTEP-BACK-FTP-MACHINE}/@value{GNUSTEP-BACK-FTP-DIRECTORY}}.

It is accompanied by gnustep-back-@value{GNUSTEP-BACK-VERSION}.tar.gz.sig, a
PGP signature which you can validate by putting both files in the same
directory and using:

@example
gpg --verify gnustep-back-@value{GNUSTEP-BACK-VERSION}.tar.gz.sig
@end example

Signature has been created using the key with the following fingerprint:

@example
83AA E47C E829 A414 6EF8  3420 CA86 8D4C 9914 9679
@end example
@end ifset

Read the INSTALL file or the GNUstep-HOWTO for installation instructions.

@section Where do I send bug reports?

Please log bug reports on the GNUstep project page
@url{http://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?group=gnustep} or send
bug reports to @email{bug-gnustep@@gnu.org}.


@section Obtaining GNUstep Software

Check out the GNUstep web site. (@url{http://www.gnustep.org/}) and the
GNU web site. (@url{http://www.gnu.org/})


