@c -*- texinfo -*-
@chapter Installation

@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@include version.texi

@menu
* Introduction::                
* Configuration::               
* Compilation::                 
* Installing::                  
@end menu


@node Introduction, Configuration, Top, Top
@section Introduction

This file documents the installation of the GNUstep Backend Library,
@samp{gnustep-back}. If you are installing this package as part of the
GNUstep core package, read the file GNUstep-HOWTO for more complete
instructions on how to install the entire GNUstep package (including
this library).  GNUstep-HOWTO is located at @url{http://www.gnustep.org}

You must have installed gnustep-gui before installing this library.

@node Configuration, Compilation, Introduction, Top
@section Configuration

Configuration is performed by running the @file{configure} program at a
shell prompt. You may want to use some of the optional arguments to the
@file{configure} program. Type @code{configure --help} for a list. GNUstep
specific options are at the end of this list (if any).

The backend comes with several different window server and graphics
drawing implementations. If you do nothing, the default ones will be
chosen. You can can change this using configure. For instance,
to choose the art graphical drawing implementation, run

@example
configure --enable-graphics=art
@end example

Type @code{configure --help} for a list of graphical drawing
implementations.

You can also change the name of the backend when configuring it. This is
convienient if you want to have a different backend with different
configurations. For instance, to create an xlib and and art backend,
you could do this:

@example
configure --enable-graphics=xlib --with-name=xlib
make install

make distclean
configure --enable-graphics=art --with-name=art
make install
@end example

Before running an application, choose one backend using the defaults program:

@example
defaults write NSGlobalDomain GSBackend libgnustep-xlib
@end example

@node Compilation, Installing, Configuration, Top
@section Compilation

To compile this library, type make. After this is complete, type make
install (make sure you are the root user). Some additional options you
can use with make are @samp{debug=yes} to make a debugging version of
the library and @samp{shared=no} to make a static version of the
library. See the gstep-make package for more information on these options.

@node Installing,  , Compilation, Top
@section Installing

To install, type

@example
make install
@end example

@bye


