@c -*-texinfo-*-
@ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY
@chapter NEWS
@end ifclear

@ifset TEXT-ONLY
@include version.texi
@end ifset

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.29.0}

The release includes an alpha version of the wayland backend and a few
bug fixes.

@itemize @bullet
@item Alpha version of the wayland backend.
@item Improved focus handling for WindowMaker interaction.
@item Speed up for font pattern resolving.
@end itemize

@ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.28.0}

This release includes a few bugfixes and a huge rework of multi monitor handling.

@itemize @bullet
@item Improved focus handling for WindowMaker interaction.
@item Cursor improvements.
@item Better handling of fonts with fontconfig.
@item Simplify code that converts images for X11.
@item art: Remove ftfont-old.m.
@item Use Xrandr for multi monitor support.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.27.0}

This release includes a few bugfixes.

@itemize @bullet
@item configure: Improve configuration.
@item xlib: Improve xft font classes.
@item x11: Enable drawing in secondary threads.
@item x11: Better handling of atoms. Method to get the window manager.
@item opal: Improve colour handling
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.26.2}

This release contains no changes since 0.26.1. It is released to coincide
with gnustep-gui 0.26.2, which has important bugfixes related to printing.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.26.1}

This release contains no changes since 0.26.0. It is released to coincide
with gnustep-gui 0.26.1, released to mark gnustep-base 1.25.1 as the
requirement for gnustep-gui.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.26.0}

This release includes a few bugfixes, as well as compatibility improvements
as a result of GSoC 2017 project.

@itemize @bullet
@item opal: Bridging categories between Opal and GNUstep GUI. Added onto NSColor, NSImage and NSImageRep.
@item cairo: Get -DPSshow: to work on scaled windows.
@item opal: Allow creating a NSGraphicsContext with a custom graphics port, other than a CGContext.
@item misc: Fix reported static analyser warnings.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.25.1}

Small fixes and cleanups.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.25.0}

Support for pattern phase, compositing operation, image interpolation and antialiasing per gstate.

Improvements to Win32 code.

Fix application menus under WindowMaker.

Various fixes.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.24.1}

Improvements in win32 display and mouse tracking.

Various minor bugfixes and cleanups.


@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.24.0}

Added experimental Opal backend.

Allow for ARGB visual for OpenGL.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.23.0}

Added cairo support for ms-windows.

Updated for NSInteger/CGFloat support

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.22.0}

Added new user defaults to make app icons and mini windows sticky (omnipresent)

Many improvements to Cairo rendering, including buffering, glyphs and DPI scaling.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.20.0}

Cairo is now the default backend, but falls back to art and xlib gracefully.

Fixed drawing and flipping (goes along with gui change).

More Windows improvements.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.19.0}

This is an (unstable) copy of the 0.18.0 release

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.18.0}

Many Windows improvements

Implement pattern colours for all backends.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.17.1}

Use DejaVu as another fallback font.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.17.0}

Key repeat support implemented in X11.

OpenGL fixes and improvements.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.16.0}

Transparent windows implemented in WIN32 backend, better position and
scaling of images. General cleanup of code.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.14.0}

Added code to automatically make any window which uses the
 NSDesktopWindowLevel also be omnipresent.

Many glyph drawing improvements.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.13.2}

Added basic implementation of window levels on Windows. In general a bunch of
improvements in the Windows backend.

Experimental patch for using cairo on Windows.

More support for RTF, TIFF and selctions in the pasteboard server.

There has been change in the interaction of devices with  the gui frontend. This
version or greater of the backend needs to be used with gui 0.13.2

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.13.1}

Minor improvements.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.13.0}

Many improvements to the cairo backend. Add DPSshfill for all backends.
Better handling of X event times.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.12.0}

Big improvements to the cairo graphics and Window backend. Also better
support for OpenGL.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.11.0}

Bugfixes to art and xlib.

There was some work on the Windows backend for the GDI interface by Christopher Armstrong.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.10.3}

Fixes. A lot of Cairo backend work.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.10.2}

The Backend can set UTF8 window titles where this is allowed.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.10.1}

The art graphics module is the default now. As was previously the
case, if the proper libraries are not found, the configuration will
automatically switch to xlib on winlib (whichever is appropriate).

There was a great deal of work by Tom MacSween on the windows module to
get windows and taskbars working together, closing, opening, hiding, and just
general good window management.

The Cairo module has been significantly updated and now works with
Cariro version 1.0, although you need to make some minor changes to the
Cairo library before it will work with GNUstep. Due to this, this module
is still considered beta. Ask on the mailing lists for help with this.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.10.0}

The installed name of the backend now includes an interface version number.
This avoids the potential version mismatch between the frontend (GUI) library
and the backend.

@itemize @bullet
@item Alpha blending was implemented for Windows, although it does not
seem to work on some machines.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.5}

@itemize @bullet
@item Added support for window alpha on X servers.
@item Add support for old and new freetype libs.
@item Some improvements to the Windows backend.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.4}

@itemize @bullet
@item Fast drawing on 8 bit displays was added (although it might only
speed things up on old X11 servers and/or remote servers).
@item GNUstep modifier keys are mapped to KeySyms instead of KeyCodes
@item Added a Cairo backend, although it is probably non-functional. Anyone
is invited to contribute to making it work.
@item art backend supports reading from a window.
@item Add internal window decoration handling.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.3}

@itemize @bullet
@item A number of W32 window event enhancements
@item art backend glyph drawing with alpha enhancements.
@item libwraster is no longer checked for - image functions now in frontend
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item Art backend added support for grayscale, one-isblack colorspaces.
@item Windows pasteboard interaction handling added.
@item Better focus handling on Windows.
@item Better font and draw handling on Windows.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.1}

Color on 8 bit displays works correctly now. WindowMaker properties are
always set now in case another manager is emulating WindowMaker styles.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.0}

Some more improvements to copy/paste support following ICCCM specifications
(like COMPOUND_TEXT support).

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.9}

@itemize @bullet
@item Much improved pasting support between X apps and GNUstep apps.
@item Backend headers are no longer installed (now private).
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.8}

Full multi-byte/unicode support for East Asian languages was added to
the xlib backend. The X11 server now supports use of the XIM input
method for entering non-keyboard characters. Both contributions thanks
to Kazunobu Kuriyama.

@itemize @bullet
@item Also added slightly better EWMH support. 
@item Art backend works with more versions of freetype.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.7}

Handle NSBezierPath glyph drawing in art backend. art backend compiles
with all freetype except 2.1.3 via ifdefs.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.6}

Bug fixes. See the gnustep-gui NEWS for changes.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.5}

Text system improvements. See the gnustep-gui NEWS for changes.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.3}

See the gnustep-gui NEWS for changes.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.2}

Improved font handling in art backend. Improved compositing  with
transformations and clipping in art backend.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.1}

art (libart-based) backend added. Use ./configure --enable-graphics=art
to choose this backend.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.0}

Bug fixes.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.7.9}

Bug fixes.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.7.8}

Simplified backend selection using --enable-server and
--enable-graphics. Add --with-library-flags and --with-include-flags
for adding additonal flags. Set name with --with-name

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.7.7}

First release. Most components extracted from xgps. The old backends,
xgps and xdps were depreciated in favor of this new backend, simply named
back, which can be configured for a variety of window server and
graphics implementations, and also allow for improved code sharing.

In addition there is now a window server backend for Windows computers, 
although it is in a very alpha state.

@end ifclear
