<chapter id="advanced-editing-tools">
<chapterinfo>
<authorgroup>
<author>&Anders.Lund; &Anders.Lund.mail;</author>
<author>&Dominik.Haumann; &Dominik.Haumann.mail;</author>
<!-- TRANS:ROLES_OF_TRANSLATORS -->
</authorgroup>
</chapterinfo>
<title>Advanced Editing Tools</title>

<sect1 id="advanced-editing-tools-comment">

<title>Comment/Uncomment</title>

<para>The <guimenuitem>Comment</guimenuitem> and <guimenuitem>Uncomment</guimenuitem> commands, available from the
<guimenu>Tools</guimenu> menu allow you to add or remove comment
markers to the selection, or the current line if no text is selected,
if comments are supported by the format of the text you are
editing.</para>

<para>The rules for how commenting is done are defined in the syntax
definitions, so if syntax highlighting is not used, commenting/uncommenting
is not possible. </para>

<para>Some formats define single line comment markers, some multiline
markers and some both.  If multiline markers are not available,
commenting out a selection that does not fully include its last line
is not possible.</para>

<para>If a single line marker is available, commenting single lines is
preferred where applicable, as this helps to avoid problems with
nested comments.</para>

<para>When removing comment markers, no uncommented text should be
selected. When removing multiline comment markers from a selection,
any whitespace outside the comment markers is ignored.</para>

<para><indexterm><primary>comment</primary></indexterm>
To place comment markers, use the
<menuchoice><guimenu>Tools</guimenu><guimenuitem>Comment</guimenuitem></menuchoice>
menu item or the related keyboard shortcut sequence, the default is
<keycombo action="simul">&Ctrl;<keycap>D</keycap></keycombo>.</para>

<para><indexterm><primary>uncomment</primary></indexterm>
To remove comment markers, use the
<menuchoice><guimenu>Tools</guimenu><guimenuitem>Uncomment</guimenuitem></menuchoice>
menu item or the related keyboard shortcut, the default is <keycombo
action="simul">&Ctrl;&Shift;<keycap>D</keycap></keycombo>.</para>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="advanced-editing-tools-commandline">
<title>The Editor Component Command Line</title>

<para>&kappname;'s editor component has an internal command line, allowing you to
perform various actions from a minimal &GUI;. The command line is a text entry
at the bottom of the editor area; to show it select
<menuchoice><guimenu>View</guimenu><guimenuitem>Switch to Command Line</guimenuitem></menuchoice>
or use the shortcut (default is
<keycombo action="simul"><keycap>F7</keycap></keycombo>). The editor provides
a set of commands as documented below, and additional commands can be provided
by plugins.</para>

<para>To execute a command, type the command then press the return key. The
command line will indicate whether it succeeded and possibly display a message. If
you entered the command line by pressing <keycap>F7</keycap> it will
automatically hide after a few seconds. To clear the message and enter a new
command, press <keycap>F7</keycap> again.</para>

<para>The command line has a built-in help system; issue the command
<command>help</command> to get started. To see a list of all available commands
issue <command>help list</command>; to view help for a specific command, do
<command>help <replaceable>command</replaceable></command>.</para>

<para>The command line has a built in history, so you can reuse commands already
typed. To navigate the history, use the &Up; and
&Down; keys. When showing historical commands, the argument part
of the command will be selected, allowing you to easily overwrite the
arguments.</para>

<sect2 id="advanced-editing-tools-commandline-commands">
<title>Standard Command Line Commands</title>

<variablelist>
<title>Argument types</title>

<varlistentry>
<term>BOOLEAN</term>
<listitem><para>This is used with commands that turns things on or off.
Legal values are <userinput>on</userinput>, <userinput>off</userinput>,
<userinput>true</userinput>, <userinput>false</userinput>,
<userinput>1</userinput> or <userinput>0</userinput>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>INTEGER</term>
<listitem><para>An integer number.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>STRING</term>
<listitem><para>A string, surrounded by single quotes (') or double quotes (") when it contains spaces.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>



<sect3 id="advanced-editing-tools-commandline-commands-configure">
<title>Commands for Configuring the Editor</title>

<para>These commands are provided by the editor component, and allow you to
configure the active document and view only. This is handy if you want to use
a setting different from the default settings, for example for indentation.
</para>

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-tab-width</command><arg choice="req">INTEGER width</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Sets the tab width to the number <userinput>width</userinput>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-indent-width</command><arg choice="req">INTEGER width</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Sets the indentation width to the number
<userinput>width</userinput>. Used only if you are indenting with
spaces.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-word-wrap-column</command><arg choice="req">INTEGER width</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Sets the line width for hard wrapping to
<userinput>width</userinput>. This is used if you are having your text wrapped
automatically.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-icon-border</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN enable</arg>
</cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Sets the visibility of the icon border.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-folding-markers</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN enable</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Sets the visibility of the folding markers pane.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-line-numbers</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN enable</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Sets the visibility of the line numbers pane.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-replace-tabs</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN enable</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>If enabled, tabs are replaced with spaces as you type.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-remove-trailing-space</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN enable</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>If enabled, trailing whitespace is removed whenever the cursor
leaves a line.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-show-tabs</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN enable</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>If enabled, TAB characters and trailing whitespace will be
visualized by a small dot.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-show-indent</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN enable</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>If enabled, indentation will be visualized by a vertical dotted
line.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-indent-spaces</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN enable</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>If enabled, the editor will indent with
<option>indent-width</option> spaces for each indentation level, rather than
with one TAB character.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-mixed-indent</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN enable</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>If enabled, &kappname; will use a mix of TAB and spaces for
indentation. Each indentation level will be <option>indent-width</option> wide,
and more indentation levels will be optimized to use as many TAB characters as
possible.</para>
<para>When executed, this command will additionally set space indentation enabled,
and if the indent width is unspecified it will be set to half of the
<option>tab-width</option> for the document at the time of execution.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-word-wrap</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN
enable</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Enables dynamic word wrap according to
<userinput>enable</userinput>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-replace-tabs-save</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN enable
</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>When enabled, tabs will be replaced with whitespace whenever
 the document is saved.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-remove-trailing-space-save</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN enable</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>When enabled, trailing space will be removed from each line
whenever the document is saved.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-indent-mode</command><arg choice="req">STRING name</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Sets the autoindentation mode to <userinput>name</userinput>.
If <userinput>name</userinput> is not known, the mode is set to 'none'. Valid
modes are 'none', 'normal', 'cstyle', 'haskell', 'lilypond', 'lisp', 'python',
'ruby' and 'xml'.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-auto-ident</command><arg choice="req">BOOLEAN script</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Enable or disable autoindentation.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-highlight</command><arg choice="req">STRING highlight</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Sets the syntax highlighting system for the document. The
argument must be a valid highlight name, as seen in the
<menuchoice><guimenu>Tools</guimenu><guisubmenu>Highlighting</guisubmenu></menuchoice>
menu. This command provides an autocompletion list for its
argument.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>reload-scripts</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Reload all <link linkend="dev-scripting">&javascript;
scripts</link> used by &kate;, including indenters and command line scripts.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>set-mode</command><arg choice="req">STRING mode</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Choose the filetype scheme for the current document.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>nn[oremap]</command><arg choice="req">STRING original</arg>
<arg choice="req">STRING mapped</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Map the key sequence <userinput>original</userinput> to 
<userinput>mapped</userinput>.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>

</sect3>

<sect3 id="advanced-editing-tools-commandline-commands-edit">
<title>Commands for editing</title>

<para>These commands modify the current document.</para>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>indent</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Indents the selected lines or the current line.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>unindent</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Unindents the selected lines or current line.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>cleanindent</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Cleans up the indentation of the selected lines or current line
according to the indentation settings in the document.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>comment</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Inserts comment markers to make the selection or selected lines
or current line a comment according to the text format as defined by the syntax
highlight definition for the document.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>uncomment</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Removes comment markers from the selection or selected lines
or current line according to the text format as defined by the syntax highlight
definition for the document.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>kill-line</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Deletes the current line.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>replace</command><arg choice="req"> STRING pattern</arg>
<arg choice="req">STRING replacement</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Replaces text matching <userinput>pattern</userinput> with
<userinput>replacement</userinput>. If you want to include whitespace in the
<userinput>pattern</userinput>, you must quote both the <userinput>pattern</userinput>
and <userinput>replacement</userinput> with single or double quotes. If the
arguments are unquoted, the first word is used as <userinput>pattern</userinput>
and the rest for <userinput>replacement</userinput>. If
<userinput>replacement</userinput> is empty, each occurrence of
<userinput>pattern</userinput> is removed.</para>
<para>You can set flags to configure the search by adding a colon, followed
by one or more letters each representing a configuration, giving the form
<userinput>replace:options pattern replacement</userinput>. Available options
are:

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>b</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Search backwards.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>c</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Search from cursor position.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>e</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Search in the selection only.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>r</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Do regular expression search. If set, you may use
<userinput>\N</userinput> where N is a number to represent captures in the
replacement string.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>s</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Do case sensitive search.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>p</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Prompt for permission to replace the next occurrence.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>w</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Match whole words only.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>

</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>date</command><arg choice="req">STRING format</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Inserts a date/time string as defined by the specified
<userinput>format</userinput>, or the format <quote>yyyy-MM-dd hh:mm:ss</quote>
if none is specified. The following translations are done when interpreting
<userinput>format</userinput>:

<informaltable>
<tgroup cols="2">
<tbody>
<row><entry><literal>d</literal></entry><entry>The day as number without a leading zero (1-31).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>dd</literal></entry><entry>The day as number with a leading zero (01-31).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>ddd</literal></entry><entry>The abbreviated localized day name (&eg; 'Mon'..'Sun').</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>dddd</literal></entry><entry>The long localized day name (&eg; 'Monday'..'Sunday').</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>M</literal></entry><entry>The month as number without a leading zero (1-12).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>MM</literal></entry><entry>The month as number with a leading zero (01-12).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>MMMM</literal></entry><entry>The long localized month name (&eg; 'January'..'December').</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>MMM</literal></entry><entry>The abbreviated localized month name (&eg; 'Jan'..'Dec').</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>yy</literal></entry><entry>The year as two digit number
(00-99).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>yyyy</literal></entry><entry>The year as four digit number (1752-8000).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>h</literal></entry><entry>The hour without a leading zero (0..23 or 1..12 if AM/PM display).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>hh</literal></entry><entry>The hour with a leading zero (00..23 or 01..12 if AM/PM display).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>m</literal></entry><entry>The minute without a leading zero (0..59).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>mm</literal></entry><entry>The minute with a leading zero (00..59).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>s</literal></entry><entry>The second without a leading zero (0..59).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>ss</literal></entry><entry>The second with a leading zero (00..59).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>z</literal></entry><entry>The milliseconds without leading zeroes (0..999).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>zzz</literal></entry><entry>The milliseconds with leading zeroes (000..999).</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>AP</literal></entry><entry>Use AM/PM display. AP will be replaced by either "AM" or "PM".</entry></row>
<row><entry><literal>ap</literal></entry><entry>Use am/pm display. ap will be replaced by either "am" or "pm".</entry></row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</informaltable>

</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>char</command><arg choice="req">STRING identifier</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem>
<para>This command allows you to insert literal characters by their
numerical identifier, in decimal, octal or hexadecimal form.
To use it launch the Editing Command dialog and type <userinput>char:
[number]</userinput> in the entry box, then hit
<guibutton>OK</guibutton>.</para>

<example>
<title><command>char</command> examples</title>

<para>Input: <userinput>char:234</userinput></para>
<para>Output: <computeroutput>&#234;</computeroutput></para>
<para>Input: <userinput>char:0x1234</userinput></para>
<para>Output: <computeroutput>&#x1234;</computeroutput></para>
</example>

</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term>
<indexterm><primary>replace, sed style</primary>
<secondary>search, sed style</secondary></indexterm>
<command>s///[ig]</command> <command>%s///[ig]</command></term>

<listitem>
<para>This command does a sed-like search/replace operation on the
current line, or on the whole file (<command>%s///</command>).</para>

<para>In short, the text is searched for text matching the
<emphasis>search pattern</emphasis>, the regular expression between
the first and the second slash, and when a match is found, the
matching part of the text is replaced with the expression between the
second and last slash. Parentheses in the search pattern
create <emphasis>back references</emphasis>, that is the command
remembers which part of the string matched in the parentheses; these
strings can be reused in the replace pattern, referred to as
<userinput>\1</userinput> for the first set of parentheses,
<userinput>\2</userinput> for the second and so on.</para>

<para>To search for a literal <literal>(</literal> or
<literal>)</literal>, you need to <emphasis>escape</emphasis> it using
a backslash character: <userinput>\(\)</userinput></para>

<para>If you put an <userinput>i</userinput> at the end of the
expression, the matching will be case insensitive. If you put a
<userinput>g</userinput> at the end, all occurrences of the pattern will be
replaced, otherwise only the first occurrence is replaced.</para>

<example>

<title>Replacing text in the current line</title>

<para>Your friendly compiler just stopped, telling you that the class
<classname>myClass</classname> mentioned in line 3902 in your source file
is not defined.</para>

<para>&quot;Buckle!&quot; you think, it is of course
<classname>MyClass</classname>. You go to line 3902, and instead of trying
to find the word in the text, you launch the Editing Command Dialog,
enter <userinput>s/myclass/MyClass/i</userinput>, hit the
<guibutton>OK</guibutton> button, save the file and compile &ndash;
successfully without the error.</para>

</example>

<example>
<title>Replacing text in the whole file</title>

<para>Imagine that you have a file, in which you mention a <quote>Miss
Jensen</quote> several times, when someone comes in and tells you that
she just got married to <quote>Mr Jones</quote>. You want, of course,
to replace each and every occurrence of <quote>Miss Jensen</quote>
with <quote>Ms Jones</quote>.</para>

<para>Enter the command line and issue the command
<userinput>%s/Miss Jensen/Ms Jones/</userinput> and hit return, you
are done.</para>

</example>

<example>
<title>A More Advanced Example</title>

<para>This example makes use of <emphasis>back references</emphasis>
as well as a <emphasis>character class</emphasis> (if you do not know what
that is, please refer to the related documentation mentioned
below).</para>

<para>Suppose you have the following line:

<programlisting>void MyClass::DoStringOps( String      &amp;foo, String &amp;bar, String *p, int  &amp;a, int &amp;b )</programlisting>
</para>
<para>Now you realize that this is not nice code, and decide that you
want to use the <constant>const</constant> keyword for all
<quote>address of</quote> arguments, those characterized by the &amp;
operator in front of the argument name. You would also like to
simplify the white space, so that there is only 1 whitespace character
between each word.</para>

<para>Launch the Editing Command Dialog, and enter:
<userinput>s/\s+(\w+)\s+(&amp;)/ const \1 \2/g</userinput> and hit the
<guibutton>OK</guibutton> button. The <userinput>g</userinput> at the end of the expression makes
the regular expression recompile for each match to save the <emphasis>backreferences</emphasis>.</para>

<para>Output:

<computeroutput>void MyClass::DoStringOps( const String &amp;foo, const String &amp;bar, String *p, const int &amp;a, const int &amp;b )</computeroutput></para>

<para>Mission completed! Now, what happened? Well, we looked for some
white space (<literal>\s+</literal>) followed by one or more
alphabetic characters (<literal>\w+</literal>) followed by some more
whitespace (<literal>\s+</literal>) followed by an ampersand, and in
the process saved the alphabetic chunk and the ampersand for reuse in
the replace operation. Then we replaced the matching part of our line
with one whitespace followed by <quote>const</quote> followed by one
whitespace followed by our saved alphabetical chunk
(<literal>\1</literal>) followed by one whitespace followed by our
saved ampersand (<literal>\2</literal>)</para>

<para>Now in some cases the alphabetical chunk was
<quote>String</quote>, in some <quote>int</quote>, so using the
character class <literal>\w</literal> and the <literal>+</literal>
quantifier proved a valuable asset.</para>

</example>

</listitem>

</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>sort</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Sorts the selected text or entire document.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>natsort</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Sort the selected lines or entire document naturally.</para>

<example>
<title><command>sort</command> vs. <command>natsort</command></title>
<para><userinput><command>sort</command>(a10, a1, a2)</userinput> results in
                            <computeroutput>a1, a10, a2</computeroutput></para>
<para><userinput><command>natsort</command>(a10, a1, a2)</userinput> results in
                            <computeroutput>a1, a2, a10</computeroutput></para>
</example></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>moveLinesDown</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Move selected lines down.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>moveLinesUp</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Move selected lines up.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>uniq</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Remove duplicated lines from the selected text or the whole
document.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>rtrim</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Remove trailing space from the selected text or the whole
document.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>ltrim</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Remove leading space from the selected text or the whole
document.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>join</command><arg choice="opt">STRING separator</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Join selected lines or whole document.  Optionally takes a parameter
defining a separator, for example:  <userinput><command>join</command> ', '</userinput>
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>rmblank</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Remove all blank spaces from the selected text or the whole
document.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>unwrap</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Unwrap the selected text or the whole document.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>each</command><arg choice="req">STRING script</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Given a &javascript; function as an argument, call that for the list of
selected lines and replace them with the return value of that callback.</para>

<example>
<title>Join selected lines</title>
<para><userinput><command>each</command> 'function(lines){return lines.join(", ")}'
</userinput></para>

<para>Or, more briefly:</para>
<para><userinput><command>each</command> 'lines.join(", ")'</userinput></para>
</example>

</listitem>
</varlistentry>



<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>filter</command><arg choice="req">STRING script</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Given a &javascript; function as an argument, call that for the list of
selected lines and remove those where the callback returns false.</para>

<example>
<title>Remove blank lines</title>
<para><userinput><command>filter</command> 'function(1){return 1.length > 0;}'
</userinput></para>

<para>Or, more briefly:</para>
<para><userinput><command>filter</command> 'line.length > 0'</userinput></para>
</example>

</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>map</command><arg choice="req">STRING script</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Given a &javascript; function as an argument, call that for the list of
selected lines and replace the line with the value of the callback.</para>

<example>
<title>Remove blank lines</title>
<para><userinput><command>map</command> 'function(line){return
line.replace(/^s+/,"");}'
</userinput></para>

<para>Or, more briefly:</para>
<para><userinput><command>map</command> 'line.replace(/^s+/,"")'</userinput></para>
</example>

</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>duplicateLinesUp</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Duplicate the selected lines above the current selection.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>duplicateLinesDown</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Duplicate the selected lines below the current selection.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>

</sect3>

<sect3 id="advanced-editing-tools-commandline-commands-navigation">
<title>Commands for navigation</title>

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>goto</command><arg choice="req">INT line</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>This command navigates to the specified line.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>grep</command> <arg choice="req">STRING pattern</arg>
</cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Search the document for the regular expression
<userinput>pattern</userinput>. For more information, see
<xref linkend="regular-expressions" />.</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>find</command><arg choice="req">STRING pattern</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>This command navigates to the first occurrence of
<userinput>pattern</userinput> according to the configuration. Following
occurrences can be found using
<menuchoice><guimenu>Edit</guimenu><guimenuitem>Find Next</guimenuitem></menuchoice>
(the default shortcut is <keycap>F3</keycap>).</para>
<para>The find command can be configured by appending a colon followed by one or
more options, the form is
<userinput>find:options pattern</userinput>. The
    following options are supported:</para>

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>b</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Search backwards.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>c</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Search from cursor position.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>e</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Search in the selection only.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>r</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Do regular expression search. If set, you may use
<userinput>\N</userinput> where N is a number to represent captures in the
replacement string.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>s</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Do case sensitive search.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>w</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Match whole words only.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>
</listitem>

</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>ifind</command><arg choice="req">STRING pattern</arg></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>This command provides <quote>as-you-type</quote> searching. You
can configure the behavior of the search by appending a colon
followed by one or more options, like this:
<userinput>ifind:options pattern</userinput>. Allowed options are:

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>b</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Search backwards.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>r</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Do regular expression search.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>s</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Do case sensitive search.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><userinput>c</userinput></term>
<listitem><para>Search from cursor position.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>

</sect3>


<sect3 id="advanced-editing-tools-commandline-commands-basic">
<title>Commands for Basic Editor Functions (These depend on the application the editor component is used in)</title>

<variablelist>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>w</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Save the current document.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>wa</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Save all currently open documents.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>q</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Close the current document.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>qa</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Close all open documents.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>wq</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Save and close the current document.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>wqa</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Save and close all currently open documents.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>x</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Save and close the current document only if it has changed.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>x</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Save and close all currently open documents only if they have
changed.</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>bp</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Go to the previous document in the documents list.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>bn</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Go to the next document in the documents list.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>new</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Open a new document in horizontal split view.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>vnew</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Open a new document in vertical split view.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>e</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Reload the current document if it has changed on disk.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>enew</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Edit a new document.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

<varlistentry>
<term><cmdsynopsis><command>print</command></cmdsynopsis></term>
<listitem><para>Open the Print dialog to print the current document.
</para></listitem>
</varlistentry>

</variablelist>

</sect3>


</sect2>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="advanced-editing-tools-code-folding">
<title>Using Code Folding</title>

<para>Code folding allows you to hide parts of a document in the editor, making
it easier to overview large documents. In &kappname; the foldable regions are
calculated using rules defined in the syntax highlight definitions, and
therefore it is only available in some formats - typically program source code,
XML markup and similar. Most highlight definitions supporting code folding
also lets you manually define foldable regions, typically using the
<userinput>BEGIN</userinput> and <userinput>END</userinput> keywords.</para>

<para>To use the code folding feature, activate the folding markers using
<menuchoice><guimenu>View</guimenu><guimenuitem>Show Folding
Markers</guimenuitem></menuchoice> menu item if they are not already visible.
The Folding Markers Pane on the left side of the screen displays a graphical
view of the foldable regions, with triangle symbols to indicate the possible operation
on a given region: a top down triangle means that the region is expanded, clicking it will
collapse the region and a right pointing triangle will be displayed instead.</para>
<!--FIXME change Three to Four when Unfold Toplevel Nodes action is back-->
<para>Three commands are provided to manipulate the state of folding regions,
 see the <link linkend="view-code-folding">menu documentation</link>.
 </para>

<para>The folded lines are remembered when a file is closed, so when you reopen
the file the folded nodes will still be folded. This applies to reload operations
as well.</para>

<para>If you do not want to use the code folding feature, you can disable
the <guilabel>Show folding markers (if available)</guilabel> option in the
<link linkend="appearance">Appearance</link> page of the editor
configuration.</para>

</sect1>

</chapter>
