@c -*- texinfo -*-
@chapter Announcement
@ifset TEXT-ONLY
@include version.texi
@end ifset

This is version @value{GNUSTEP-GUI-VERSION} of the GNUstep GUI library (@samp{gnustep-gui}).

@section What is the GNUstep GUI Library?

It is a library of graphical user interface classes written completely
in the Objective-C language; the classes are based upon Apple's Cocoa
framework.  The library has been enhanced in a number of ways to take
advantage of the GNU system.  These classes include graphical objects
such as buttons, text fields, popup lists, browser lists, and windows;
there are also many associated classes for handling events, colors,
fonts, pasteboards and images.

   The GNUstep GUI Library is designed in two parts.  The first part is
the front-end component which is independent of platform and display
system.  This front-end is combined with a back-end component which
handles all of the display system dependent such as specific calls to
X/Windows.  This design allows the GNUstep applications to have the
"look and feel" of the underlying display system without any changes to
the application, and the library can be easily ported to other display
systems.

   The GNUstep GUI Library requires the GNU Objective-C compiler, the
GNUstep Base Library, the TIFF Graphics library, Independent JPEG
Group's libjpeg library, and a back-end component from the GNUstep
'Back' library.

   Additional functionality may be enabled by installing additional
libraries. For example, to build the Cairo backend in the GNUstep Back
library, you will need to install Cairo.

@set ANNOUNCE-ONLY
@include news.texi
@clear ANNOUNCE-ONLY

@section Where can you get it?  How can you compile it?

@ifset GNUSTEP-GUI-FTP-MACHINE
The gnustep-gui-@value{GNUSTEP-GUI-VERSION}.tar.gz distribution
file has been placed at @url{ftp://@value{GNUSTEP-GUI-FTP-MACHINE}/@value{GNUSTEP-GUI-FTP-DIRECTORY}}.

It is accompanied by gnustep-gui-@value{GNUSTEP-GUI-VERSION}.tar.gz.sig, a
PGP signature which you can validate by putting both files in the same
directory and using:

@example
gpg --verify gnustep-gui-@value{GNUSTEP-GUI-VERSION}.tar.gz.sig
@end example

Signature has been created using the key with the following
fingerprint:

@example
83AA E47C E829 A414 6EF8  3420 CA86 8D4C 9914 9679
@end example
@end ifset

Read the INSTALL file or the GNUstep-HOWTO for installation instructions.

@section Where do I send bug reports?

Please log bug reports on the GNUstep project page
@url{http://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?group=gnustep} or send
bug reports to @email{bug-gnustep@@gnu.org}.

@section Obtaining GNU Software

Check out the GNUstep web site. (@url{http://www.gnustep.org/}), and
the GNU web site. (@url{http://www.gnu.org/})


