@c -*- texinfo -*-
@chapter Installation
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@include version.texi


@menu
* Introduction::                
* Configuration::               
* Compilation::                 
* Installing::                  
* Post-Installation::           
@end menu

@node Introduction, Configuration, Top, Top
@section Introduction

This file documents the installation of the GNUstep GUI Library,
@samp{gnustep-gui}. If you are installing this package as part of the
GNUstep core package, read the file GNUstep-HOWTO for more complete
instructions on how to install the entire GNUstep package (including
this library).  GNUstep-HOWTO is located at @url{http://www.gnustep.org}
and in the gnustep-make package (which you should install first).

You must have installed gnustep-base and gnustep-make 
before building this library. GNUstep Make version 2.0.0 or greater is
required. GNUstep Base version 1.15.0 or greater is required.

Other external libraries that you should have installed include:

@itemize
@item tiff (REQUIRED)
@item jpeg (RECOMMENDED)
@item png (RECOMMENDED)
@item gif or ungif (OPTIONAL)
@item aspell (OPTIONAL)
@item cups (OPTIONAL)
@item audiofile (OPTIONAL)
@item portaudio, v19 which has several API changes previous version (OPTIONAL)
@end itemize

Read the GNUstep-HOWTO for more information.  After installing this
library, install gnustep-back.

@node Configuration, Compilation, Introduction, Top
@section Configuration

Configuration is performed by running the @file{configure} program at a
shell prompt. You may want to use some of the optional arguments to the
@file{configure} program. Type @code{configure --help} for a list. GNUstep
specific options are at the end of this list (if any).

@node Compilation, Installing, Configuration, Top
@section Compilation

To compile this library, type make. After this is complete, type make
install (make sure you are the root user). Some additional options you
can use with make are @samp{debug=yes} to make a debugging version of
the library and @samp{shared=no} to make a static version of the
library. See the gstep-make package for more information on these options.

@node Installing, Post-Installation, Compilation, Top
@section Installing

To install, type

@example
make install
@end example

@node Post-Installation,  , Installing, Top
@section Post Installation

GNUstep gui comes with a tool called @samp{make_services} which builds
a list of installed applications and services. This list is used to find
services for the services menu, for instance. This tool should be run
after a new service or application is installed in the system. Theoretically,
a workspace application, such as GWorkspace, should do this automatically.
But this is not done at the current time. You might consider running this
service automatically, perhaps in a login script, to make sure the service
and application lists are updated regularly.

@bye
