@c -*-texinfo-*-
@ifset TEXT-ONLY
@include version.texi
@end ifset

@ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY
@chapter NEWS

The currently released version of the library is @samp{@value{GNUSTEP-GUI-VERSION}}.
@end ifclear

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.29.0}

This version adds support for storyboard files and many new
classes. Plus the usual bunch of bug fixes.

@itemize @bullet
@item Support loading of storyboard files.
@item Add classes NSSwitch, NSFontAssetRequest,
NSMediaLibraryBrowserController, NSScrubberItemView, NSScrubberLayout,
NSScrubber, NSSharingServicePickerToolbarItem, NSPathCell,
NSPathComponentCell, NSPathControl, NSPathControlItem,
NSPersistentDocument, NSAccessibilityCustomAction,
NSAccessibilityCustomRotor, NSAccessibilityElement, NSStoryboard,
NSStoryboardSegue, NSPageController, NSSplitViewController,
NSSplitViewItem, NSTabViewController, NSLayoutAnchor,
NSLayoutConstraint, NSLayoutGuide, NSStatusBarButton,
NSTextCheckingController, NSTextFinder, NSTextInputContext.
Some of these classes are still skeletons.
@item Fix extraline fragment in text layout.
@item Better encoding handling in RTF files.
@item Add more italian translations.
@item Add MacOSX methods to NSNib, NSMenu and NSWindow.
@item Focus handling fixes for WindowMaker.
@item Fix missing colours when loading old colour lists.
@item Support JPEG export as greyscale image.
@item Fix memory leak in NSPopupButtonCell.
@item Fix toolbar flickering.
@item NSSearchFieldCell use code from GSTheme to disolay popup.
@item Fix int decoding to get it working on 64 bit big endian machines.
@item Add tab stops after last defined at default intervals.
@end itemize

@ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.28.0}

This version adds support for modern XIB files and many new
classes. Plus the usual bunch of bug fixes.

@itemize @bullet
@item Support loading of document XIB files.
@item Improve Key Value Binding for NSArrayController and add more bindings.
@item Better support for multi monitor usage and other improvement in
the backend integration.
@item Add classes NSFontCollection, NSColorSampler, NSSpeechRecognizer,
NSAppearance, NSPDFInfo, NSPICTImageRep, NSCIImageRep, NSPDFImageRep,
NSPDFPanel, NSDataAsset, 
NSDatePicker, NSDatePickerCell, NSPredicateEditor, 
NSPredicateEditorRowTemplate, NSRuleEditor, NSGestureRecognizer,
NSButtonTouchBarItem, NSCandidateListTouchBarItem,
NSClickGestureRecognizer, NSColorPickerTouchBarItem,
NSCustomTouchBarItem, NSGroupTouchBarItem,
NSMagnificationGestureRecognizer, NSPanGestureRecognizer,
NSPickerTouchBarItem, NSPopoverTouchBarItem, NSPressGestureRecognizer,
NSRotationGestureRecognizer, NSSharingServicePickerTouchBarItem,
NSSliderTouchBarItem, NSStepperTouchBarItem, NSTouchBarItem, NSTouchBar,
NSTouch, NSDockTile.
@item Implement NSEPSImageRep.
@item Better encoding handling in RTF files.
@item Theming and drawing improvements.
@item Increase small font size to 10.
@item New cursor and stepper images.
@item Move NSFileWrapper to Foundation.
@item Fixed build on Debian GNU/kFreeBSD.
@item With command line argument -autolaunch YES, do not activate the
application when -activateIgnoringOtherApps: is invoked.
@item Improvements to WindowMaker compatibility (e.g. WMFHideApplication
support).
@item Lowered NSFloatingWindowLevel by one to distinguish floating panels from
menus.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.27.0}

This version includes numerous bugfixes, compatibility
improvements and other changes accumulated over the last year.
It also enables work to be done on integrating NSViews with a Core
Animation renderer.

@itemize @bullet
@item Make targetForAction safer.
@item Speed up menu updates.
@item Clean up speech tool compilation and switch to newer interface.
@item Fix bug in CUPS subclassing introduced in last release.
@item Minor improvements to typesetting.
@item Add NSIsControllerMarker.
@item Fix tracking on segmented cell.
@item Bring slider cell closer to Cocoa implementation.
@item Add ivar for Core Animation in NSView.
@item Improve border calculation on printing.
@item Lazy load app icon.
@item Better detection of removable volumes.
@item Polish translations.
@item Japanese translations.
@item Lots of bug fixes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.26.2}

This version is a small, but important bugfix release.

@itemize @bullet
@item printing: Fix allocation of the CUPS printing classes.
@item installation: Fix the configure script.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.26.1}

This version is released to conincide with version 1.25.1 of
gnustep-base, which contains changes required for this version of
gnustep-gui and gnustep-back.

It includes an important workaround for users of GNUstep
Objective-C Runtime (libobjc2) and non-fragile ABI to avoid a bug
in interaction between the clang compiler and the runtime
when non-fragile ABI is in use. Specifically, Clang and the
runtime may disagree on what is the offset of an ivar
in a class's RAM. This manifested in a crash at application
startup due to misalignment of _gcontext inside NSThread. See
the
@uref{http://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/discuss-gnustep/2017-12/msg00129.html, mailing list discussion}
for more information.

It also contains the following changes:

@itemize @bullet
@item tests: Cleanup of warnings.
@item tests: Fix text system deallocation test.
@item printing: Undefine __BLOCKS__ before including cups.h, as some versions of the header expect that libdispatch is present and used if __BLOCKS__ is defined.
@item graphics context: Workaround for Clang+libobjc2+nonfragile ABI issue.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.26.0}

This version was bumped due to previous binary incompatibilities
between 0.25.0 and 0.25.1. This version also includes numerous
compatibility improvements from the Summer of Code
project, and a wide variety of other fixes. Notably, it fixes the
use of cupsGetPPD() in the printing system.

@itemize @bullet
@item printing: Add an include to get deprecated function cupsGetPPD() on newer CUPS systems.
@item chore: Bump required base version.
@item tiff: Support for writing resolution.
@item jpeg: Save resolution information if it is different from 72 dpi.
@item save panel: Fix return type of sorting function.
@item events: Add some newer Cocoa enums and one method with dummy implementation.
@item speech synthesis: NSSpeechSynthesizerDelegate is now a @@protocol on runtimes that support it.
@item pasteboard: New type identifiers.
@item translations: Some work on Polish, Russian and German translations
@item cell: Improvements to mouse tracking logic on NSCell.
@item image: If an unknown named image is unarchived with a coder or keyed coder, keep the name.
@item screen: Add -backingScaleFactor and return 1.0.
@item window: Return 1.0 from -backingScaleFactor.

@item compatibility: Numerous stub implementations of constants, classes and methods to improve source-level compatibility.
@item other bugfixes
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.25.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item JPEG (saving) alpha channel fixes and size with resolution != 72
@item JPEG resolution read support
@item TIFF saving fixes
@item Improved volumes mounting and support
@item Portability improvements in volume mounting and support
@item Corrected layout of empty strings
@item Only update visible menus
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.25.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Fixes for new GIF library versions
@item Theming of named images for specific applications by the use of the CFBundleIdentifier in the theme
@item New icons and corresponding constants for special folders, recycler and others
@item Improvements in NSWorkspace icon lookup
@item Improvements in removable media commands, imported and cleaned from GWorkspace
@item Numerous bug fixes and improvements in Cocoa compatibility
@item Numerous theme tweaks
@item Spanish locale
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.24.1}

From a look through ChangeLog, we can see a lot of bugfixes for this release,
with the main focus on avoiding display glitches and improving OSX
compatibility.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.24.0}

New features include:
@itemize @bullet
@item Require newer base release as we moved the
-replaceObject:withObject: of NSKeyedUnarchiver there.
@item Support for newer releases of the gif library.
@item NSTabView is now flipped.
@item Theme improvements and changes to image mapping.
@end itemize

Many bugfixes.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.23.1}

This is a bugfix release, primarily to deal with coding/archiving issues.


@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.22.0}

New features include:
@itemize @bullet
@item This version is binary incompatible with previous versions due to the change of NSNotFound in GNUstep base.
@item Support for drawing the GUI with a scale factor, for high-DPI monitors.
@item Character panel
@item Color picker ``Magnifier'' tool, for grabbing the color of arbitrary parts of the screen
@end itemize

Many NSImage improvements (Mac OS X 10.6 drawing methods, better selection of image reps, better support for icons). Many bugfixes, including in Xib loading, printing, and NSView geometry.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.20.0}

A new stable release. Many improvments with Nib loading, documents and
document controllers. Fixed many drawing issues, particularly
ones related to flipping. Much improved theming.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.19.0}

This is an (unstable) copy of the 0.18.0 release

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.18.0}

A new stable release that has had many improvements. Many new
Mac OS X methods (10.5 and newer) were added. Many Windows specific
improvements were made (particularly with the use of the Windows theme).
There is also better compatibility with Mac OS X in terms of usage of NSInteger
and other definitions.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.17.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item New Mac OS X 10.5 methods in NSFont
@item Add live resize in NSSplitView
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.17.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item New Mac OS X 10.5 methods in many classes
@item Toolbars have been completely rewritten and improved.
@item Several improvements for Garbage Collection
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.16.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Nib loading refractored and improved.
@item Added support for autosaving in NSDocuments
@item NSWindowController made a subclass of NSResponder
@item NSTokenField and netokenFiledCell classes added.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.14.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item New class NSGlyphGenerator for glyph generation
@item NSSplitView implemented setAutosaveName:
@item NSOpenGLView added some Mac OS X 10.3 methods
@item Manu bug fixes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.13.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item Printing works a little better now.
@item NSPopUpButtonCell - object encoding was changed
@item NSTextView - several updates and Mac OS X methods added
@item NSWindow - devince interaction was changed.  You need to use
gnustep-back 0.13.2 with this version
@item New class NSSegmentedCell.
@item NSDrawer was implemented.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.13.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item NSMenu - Added more MacOS X methods and an ivar.
@item Added support for hiding views.
@item Added Key-Value bindings implementation (NSKeyValueBinding)
with support in several classes (NSControl, NSTextField, NSView, etc).
@item Added some MacOS X 10.4 methods to NSTableView.
@item Changed the NSCursor hot point to 0,0 for MacOS X compatibility.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.13.0}

This is an unstable release. There may be backward compatibility issues
with previous releases of the gui library.

@itemize @bullet
@item Switched to use LGPL 3 and GPL 3.
@item Added new methods from Mac OS X 10.4 for NSDragging, NSFontDescriptor,
NSAttributedString, NSImageView, NSStringDrawing, NSParagraphStyle,
NSView, NSCell, NSActionCell, NSAlert, NSApplication, NSBitmapImageRep,
NSBox, NSColor, NSColorSpace, NSComboBox, NSComboBoxCell,
NSDocumentController, NSEvent, NSScreen, NSFont, NSFontManager,
NSFormCell, NSForm, NSWindow, NSTextField, NSTextFieldCell. Some ivar
names were changed also. 
@item Moved Postscript printing methods from NSView to NSGraphicsContext.
@item Rewrote the NSView drawing mechanism to always use
[displayRectIgnoringOpacity:inContext].
@item Report more controls as being flipped. (NSTextField, NSTableHeaderView,
NSSlider, NSProgressIndicator, NSButton) NSTabView is still missing.
@item In NSAffineTransform use optimized primitive methods from base.
@item Add font attribute fixing to NSAttributedString. To allow for the output
of glyphs not present in the current font.
@item Optimized the validation of edited cells.
@item Implementation of special connectors for Key-Value binding.
@item Base library version 1.15.1 is required for this release
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.12.0}

It has been a long time since the last release and many things have been
added and changed, including new classes, new ivars, and new methods.

@itemize @bullet
@item Lots of improvements to the NSBitmapImage subclasses thanks to Mark Tracy
@item GSTheme and other classes were added to improve support of theming.
@item Added new methods from Mac OS X 10.4 for NSControl, NSResponder,
NSDocument, NSPrintOperation, NSWindowController, NSCell,
NSMenuItem, NSView. Some ivar names were changed also.
@item Added new ivars for NSMenuItem, NSPrintOperation, NSTableView,
NSDrawer, NSScrollView.
@item New classes from Mac OS X 10.4 and earlier were added including
NSLevelIndicator, NSObjectController, NSUserDefaultsController,
NSKeyValueBinding, NSArrayController, NSController.
@item NSSpellServer and NSAffineTransform was moved to GNUstep base 
for Mac OS X compatibility.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.11.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Added support for keyed encoding in all gui classes.
@item Added mechanism to allow for dynamic extension of 
model loading mechanism
@item Implemented glue code in GSNibCompatibility for 
classes such as NSIBObjectData, NSClassSwapper, etc. to 
facilitate nib loading.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.10.3}

@itemize @bullet
@item Horizontal menus now work
@item Better support for tracking active applications.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.10.2}

Mostly bug fixes.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.10.1}

GNUstep now uses v19 of portaudio for the sound daemon. Version v19
hasn't been officially released, but it is still used in several
distributions (SuSE, etc) as v18 is very old.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.10.0}

This release is binary incompatible with previous releases.
The interface version of the library has changed so that apps, tools
and libraries that use the base library need to be recompiled to use
this new version.

@itemize @bullet
@item Model loading supports window auto-positioning
@item Keyed encoding is supported in many classes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.5}

@itemize @bullet
@item Beginnings of CUPS interface were added.
@item Added new control colors and methods from 10.3 version of Cocoa.
@item Added new font methods from 10.3 version of Cocoa.
@item NSApplication -runModalSession behavior changed.
@item You can find the GUI library's version using the Info.plist
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.4}

@itemize @bullet
@item The printing classes have been completely reorganized to 
accommodate different native printing systems (Thanks to Chad Hardin).
@item PPD files have been moved to a separate package.
@item NSToolbar now allows rearranging items.
@item NSScroller, NSScrollView has a new ivar.
@item Some improvement of NSDataLink classes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.3}

@itemize @bullet
@item Spell checker reimplemented using libaspell
@item New NSComboBox implementation
@item NSToolbar much improved
@item Binary incompatibilites from ivar additions in NSView and subclasses.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item Working NSToolbar implementation
@item New Mac OS X methods in NSView and other classes
@item Fixed some sheet handling problems.
@item Integrated gif, jpg, and png handling in front-end.
@item Added overridable button and frame drawing functions
@item Add some keyed decode/encoding to some classes
@item NSStringDrawing redesigned.
@item Much improved loading of gorm files
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item NSWindow - DnD works on whole window and events are propogated up to
first DnD aware view.
@item Absolute paths and DnD works in OpenPanels.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.0}

Improvements in various classes, include NSPopUpButton, NSBitmapImageRep,
NSMenu, NSToolbar. Added support for thumbnail images in NSWorkspace.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.9}

Note that many headers have moved to new locations (both in the package and
when installed), so it is possible, although not likely that some 
applications may not compile because they cannot find the right header.

@itemize @bullet
@item New Language Setup documentation.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.8}

@itemize @bullet
@item Updated LanguageSetup documentation
@item Improved RTF reader (unicode support, etc).
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.7}

@itemize @bullet
@item NSBezierPath glyph methods implemented (depends on backend).
@item NSDataLink[Panel/Manager] - some implementation
@item Added default to load user-defined bundles (GSAppKitUserBundles default).
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.6}

Updated to install in new locations based on changes in gnustep-make 1.7.0.

@itemize @bullet
@item New implementation of RTF producer (from Axel "Mikesch" Katerbau)
@item Speed improvements, especially in tracking mouses movements.
@item Lots of menu improvements.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.5}

Bug fixes. NSStringDrawing now uses text system implementation.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.4}

This release features a brand new text and layout system thanks
to Alexander Malmberg. Other improvements include:

@itemize @bullet
@item Various display optimizations.
@item Default border to NSScrollView changed
@item Printing fixes.
@item NSToolbar partially implemented.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.3}

@itemize @bullet
@item Additions for Gorm support.
@item Alpha support for OpenGL
@item Better ruler support - dragging of tab markers.
@item Document support, recent files, etc.
@item Simple printing to printer and print previewing.
@item Window focus fixes
@item Key view handling rewritten.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item Handle fonts that aren't found better.
@item Implement pageUp/Down.
@item Some window focusing problems fixed.
@item Quartz-like interface partially implemented.
@item NSSecureTextField partially rewritten. More secure.
@item NSBrowser: implement non-separate columns
@item Fix firstResponder status in text fields.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item Handle scaled curves correctly.
@item Handle alpha channel with images correctly
@item NSWindow frame string save without flipping coordinates.
@item NSSound implemented. gssnd sound server.
@item Spell checker starts correctly now.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.8.0}

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.7.9}

@itemize @bullet
@item NSTableView, NSOutlineView improvements.
@item Menus no longer work in modal loop.
@item Skeleton implementation of NSToolBar
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.7.8}

@itemize @bullet
@item Wheel color picker, standard color picker (bundles) added.
@item System colors now use named colors. Easier configuration
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.7.7}

The graphics/window interface was completely revamped. Window functions
were split into a separate class, GSDisplayServer, and many PS and DPS
functions were removed that were never implemented. However, new functionality
was added to make things faster and eventually implement Quartz compatibility.

In addition, the old backends, xgps and xdps were depreciated in favor of
a new backend, simply named back, which can be configured for a
variety of window server and graphics implementations, and also allow
for improved code sharing.

In addition there is now a window server backend for Windows computers, 
although it is in a very alpha state.

Other improvements:
@itemize @bullet
@item Mutliple screens are now handled properly (untested)
@item Better autolayout with GSTable and subclasses.
@item NSOutlineView much improved.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.7.6}

@itemize @bullet
@item NSOutlineView implemented.
@item Improvements to NSTableView, NSPopUpButton, NSTextView, NSFontPanel
@item Scroll wheel support.
@item Fully-functional keybindings, including multi-stroke keybindings.
@item Memory panel available from Info Panel.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.7.5}

@itemize @bullet
@item Drag and drop and image sliding much improved.
@item Better handling of remote startup/display.
@item Some localization.
@item Keybinding support.
@item Text handling improvements.
@item New gopen command (like MacOSX open command).
@item Implemented simple pagination and printing of views.
@item Support for rulers.
@item Spell checking support.
@item Blinking insertion point.
@item New NSStepper class.
@item Implemented NSOutlineView, NSSelection, NSInputManager.
@item Near rewrite of Menu handling code.
@item Gmodel code compiled as a separate bundle.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.7.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Much improvement in NSBrowser, NSMatrix, NSPopUpButton, combo boxes.
@item NSTextAttachement implemented, many other text improvements.
@item Fonts cached in the frontend.
@item Changes so that backend can be loaded as a bundle at runtime.
@item simpler, faster compilation and installation.
@item NSColorWell works.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.6.7}

@itemize @bullet
@item App Icons can support documents dropped using DnD.
@item Added color conversions, working color picker and panel.
@item Almost complete rewrite of NSBezierPath
@item Loads of improvements to Text classes.
@item NSImage, NSButton, NSCell, etc, implemented many missing methods.
@item ...and even more changes to the Text classes.
@item Starting implementation of printing.
@item Scrollview fixes.
@item Implemented deferred windows.
@item NSTableView implemented.
@item Implemented object value and formatter support in NSCell
@item Support middle mouse button.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.6.6}

@itemize @bullet
@item Window hints for motif and generic window managers.
@item Major improvements to the text handling classes (NSText, NSTextView, etc)
@item Pasting of fonts and rulers.
@item Much better RTF handling
@item DnD for NSColorWell
@item Much improved NSSplitView
@item New classes - NSColorPanel, NSTableView
@item NSScreen rewritten with full support for all methods and functions.
@item Can use image reading routines from WindowMaker if available to read
a variety of image formats besides TIFF.
@item Many fixes to get the AppKit to work better with WindowMaker.
@item Much better gmodel support (particularly with nibs translated from
NeXT or OPENSTEP 4.2).
@item Muh improved font classes and font support.
@end itemize

In addition both the xgps and xdps backends have seen some large efficiency
improvements. Much better font support. The xdps backend itself has seen
speed improvements by at least a factor of 4. Note however, that the xdps
backend is still considered experimental and you may have to deal with
many problems in order to get it working. We recommend sticking with the
xgps backend (the default) for now.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.6.5}

Many of the basic GUI classes have been vastly improved or rewritten, thanks
to Nicola Pero  @email{n.pero@@mi.flashnet.it} and many others.

@itemize @bullet
@item New Info Panel support
@item New NSBezierPath
@item Rewrite of several classes including Cell and Button classes.
@item Rewrite of NSBrowser, NSSavePanel, menus, text classes, NSTableHeader.
@item RTF Parser
@item Implemented image caching.
@item Implemented editing in Forms, Matricies.
@item New autolayout classes GSHBox, GSTable, and GSVBox.
@item Almost all back-end classes have been removed and code incorporated
in a DPS-like graphics context structure.
@item Better keyboard handling.
@item NSHelpManager, NSComboBox, ProgressIndicator written.
@end itemize

In addition a preliminary version of an Interface Builder (Gorm) has
been written, thanks to Richard Frith-Macdonald @email{richard@@brainstorm.co.uk}

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.6.0}

A Huge amount of progress, although a lot still needs to be done. It's
usable for a large base of moderately simple apps. Several NeXT/OpenStep
apps and libraries have been ported with little changes.

@itemize @bullet
@item Drag and Drop support fleshed out but not completed.
@item NSText and related classes rewritten. Basic functionality but
much needs to be done to finish them off.
@item nib2gmodel app works with MacOS-X
@item Work done in minimizing the backend which allowed a lot
of functionality to move to the GNU library.
@item Menu code rewritten.
@item PopupButtons now work.
@item Many new images
@item Basic functionality for NSTabView
@item Much better lockFocus support in NSView. Flipped views handled.
@item Rewrite of NSSavePanel and NSOpenPanel
@item Several fixes that at least double the speed of the gui.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.5.5}

Too extensive to list.

@itemize @bullet

@item A lot of rewritting has been done to the classes, with general 
cleanup of coordinate conversion code, etc.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.5.0}

@itemize @bullet

@item
NSBrowser and NSBrowserCell have been implemented.  There is one odd
display artifact; lists which are smaller than the browser column area
have the list justified to the bottom of the column versus the top of
the column.  This is actually an issue with NSMatrix and will be
remedied when flip views are implemented.

@item
Two important optimizations that speed up the displaying of views and flushing
of windows have been implemented. Only the views that need display and those
that produce visible effects on the screen receive the -drawRect: message.
Flushing of windows occurs only in rectangles that get displayed not in the
whole window.

@item
Rotation and scaling of views have been finally implemented. The code
requires backend support for changing the state of the graphics context
accordingly.

@item
NSScrollView and NSClipView have been implemented. The current implemented
behavior is to call the document view to display the exposed region. Copying on
scroll will be supported soon, at least on Solaris DPS, where it seems the
Postscript language has provisions for copying drawn regions of screen.
Hopefully DGS will also have this facility by the end of the year.

@item
NSScroller has been completely reworked to gain speed by using timer events.

@item
NSSlider has been implemented. Thanks to Frank Knobloch for supporting this
and the NSScrollView implementation.

@item
NSBox has been implemented.

@item
The library has been ported to work under Solaris with the native DPS and the
NeXT/Apple's Portable Distributed Objects (PDO) environment.

@item
The library has been integrated with the makefile package so we now benefit
from all of the features the makefile package gives us, especially the
possibility to build shared libraries on various systems and having different
types (debug and profile) of the library compiled at the same time.

@item
NSCell is able to continuosly send the action to the target while the user is
tracking the mouse.

@item
Several cleanups and as usual, many bug fixes. 

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.3.0}

@itemize @bullet

@item
Completely reworked the menu class. The NSMenu class is now inherited from
NSObject and using the new implementation menus have been implemented for the
XDPS backend (they have the look and feel of the NeXTStep menus!).

@item
NSRunLoop has been integrated with NSApplication. Using this capability time
events have been implemented to NSEvent class. These events allow several
improvements in the interaction between user and the graphic interface.

@item
NSMatrix has been reworked, it is now conforming to the OpenStep specification
and it knows all the selection modes. It uses time events to enhance the
drawing speed during mouse drags.

@item
The initial implementation of NSForm has been made although it has not been
tested yet.

@item
NSPrinter has been implemented though it was not throughly tested; thanks to
Simon Frankau.

@item
Configure script has been changed to detect the underlaying Foundation library.
The currently supported libraries are gnustep-base and libFoundation.

@item
Several cleanups have been made in a lot of classes: the retain/release policy
has been fixed, the cell classes correctly implement the NSCopying protocol
and many others.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.2.0}

@itemize @bullet

@item
Additional NSImage and NSImageRep class work.  Incorporated common
images for use with controls that were designed by Andrew Lindesay.

@item
Fill out implementation of NSColorWell class.

@item
Fill out implementation of NSColorList class.

@item
Cleaned up the header files and added missing headers, methods,
categories, and protocols; thanks to Simon Frankau for much of this
work.  Major reorganization of header files.  Types and constants were
moved in the files they belong.  Each header file includes only the
headers it really needs.  Use @samp{@@class} to forward class definitions
instead of including the corresponding class file.

@item
Completely reworked the NSFont and NSFontManager classes so that
NSUserDefaults is used for getting defaults and list of known fonts are
maintained.

@item
Initial implementation of NSCursor class.

@item
Almost complete implementation of NSButton and NSButtonCell class.
Buttons can now display images and/or text, handles all of the OpenStep
button types and styles.

@item
Fill out implementation of NSScroller class.

@item
Put in underlying support for optimizing drawing; flushing of windows,
backing store, and only display when needed.

@item
Many bug fixes and minor enhancements.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.1.1}

@itemize @bullet

@item
Almost complete implementation of the PXKMenu and PXKMenuCell classes.

@item
Fill out implementation of NSFont and NSFontManager.

@item
Fill out implementation of NSColor including color spaces other than
RGB.  Now maintains the common colors as global variables.

@item
Integration with the Display Ghostscript System.  This is mainly related
to using the header files in the DPSclient library for defining the
PostScript operator functions.

@item
Initial documentation set.

@item
Initial implementation of NSImage, NSImageRep, and NSImageRep subclass
classes based upon work by Adam Fedor.

@item
Now requires the TIFF library for reading, writing, and manipulating
tiff files and images.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.1.0}

@itemize @bullet

@item
Integration of the GNUstep X/DPS GUI Backend.  This has finally
produced a set of core code with can display on X/Windows.
Much of the X/Windows code has been written by Pascal Forget 
@email{pascal@@wsc.com} and integration efforts have been lead by Scott
Christley @email{scottc@@net-community.com}.

@item
Some major directory reorganization for the new naming guidelines.
Headers previously in AppKit and DPSClient directories have been moved
to gnustep/gui and gnustep/dps directores and symbol links are
created for the AppKit and DPSClient directories.  This should allow
both GNUstep and other OpenStep implementations to reside on the
same machine without conflicts.
@end itemize

Also see the @samp{ChangeLog} file for more detail.

@end ifclear
@c end ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY
