@c -*-texinfo-*-
@chapter README

@ifset TEXT-ONLY
@include version.texi
@end ifset

The GNUstep gui library is a library of graphical user interface classes
written completely in the Objective-C language; the classes are based
upon Apple's Cocoa framwork (which came from the OpenStep specification).  
These
classes include graphical objects such as buttons, text fields, popup
lists, browser lists, and windows; there are also many associated
classes for handling events, colors, fonts, pasteboards and images.

@section Initial reading

@itemize @bullet
@item
The file @file{ANNOUNCE} contains a very brief overview of the library.
It also tells you where to get the most recent version.

@item
The file @file{NEWS} has the library's feature history.

@item
The file @file{INSTALL} gives instructions for installing the library.
@end itemize

@section License

The GNUstep libraries and library resources are covered under the GNU
Lesser Public License.  This means you can use these libraries in any
program (even non-free programs). If you distribute the libraries along
with your program, you must make the improvements you have made to the
libraries freely available. You should read the COPYING.LIB file for
more information. All files in this package EXCEPT files in the
@file{Tools} directories and subdirectories under this are covered under
the GLPL.

GNUstep tools, test programs, and other files are covered under the GNU
General Public License. This means if you make changes to these programs, you
cannot charge a fee, other than distribution fees, for others to use the
program. You should read the COPYING file for more information.  All
files in the @file{Tools} directory are covered under the GPL.

@section How can you help?

@itemize @bullet

@item
Give us feedback!  Tell us what you like; tell us what you think
could be better.  Send bug reports to @email{bug-gnustep@@gnu.org}.
@end itemize
