@c -*- texinfo -*-
@chapter Announcement

@c set the vars GNUSTEP-BASE-VERSION and GNUSTEP-BASE-GCC-VERSION
@ifclear GSTEP-BASE-MAIN
@include version.texi
@end ifclear

The GNUstep Base Library, version @value{GNUSTEP-BASE-VERSION}, is now
available.

@section What is the GNUstep Base Library?

The GNUstep Base Library is a library of general-purpose, non-graphical
Objective C objects.  For example, it includes classes for strings,
object collections, byte streams, typed coders, invocations,
notifications, notification dispatchers, moments in time, network ports,
remote object messaging support (distributed objects), and event loops.

It provides functionality that aims to implement the non-graphical
portion of the OpenStep standard (the Foundation library).  

There is more information available at the GNUstep homepage
at @samp{http://www.gnustep.org}.

@set ANNOUNCE-ONLY
@include news.texi
@clear ANNOUNCE-ONLY

@section Where can you get it?  How can you compile it?

@ifset GNUSTEP-BASE-FTP-MACHINE
The gnustep-base-@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-VERSION}.tar.gz distribution file has 
been placed at @url{ftp://@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-FTP-MACHINE}/@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-FTP-DIRECTORY}}.

It is accompanied by gnustep-base-@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-VERSION}.tar.gz.sig, a
PGP signature which you can validate by putting both files in the same
directory and using:

@example
gpg --verify gnustep-base-@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-VERSION}.tar.gz.sig
@end example

Signature has been created using the key with the following fingerprint:

@example
83AA E47C E829 A414 6EF8  3420 CA86 8D4C 9914 9679
@end example
@end ifset

Read the INSTALL file or the GNUstep-HOWTO for installation instructions.

@section Where do I send bug reports?

Please log bug reports on the GNUstep project page
@url{http://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?group=gnustep} or send bug
reports to @email{bug-gnustep@@gnu.org}.

@section Obtaining GNUstep Software

Check out the GNUstep web site. (@url{http://www.gnustep.org/}) and the
GNU web site. (@url{http://www.gnu.org/})
