\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@settitle User's Guide to the GNUstep Base Library
@setfilename gstep-base.info
@c %**end of header
@defcodeindex cl
@defcodeindex pr
@ignore
I'm using cindex for concepts, findex for methods, functions and macros,
prindex for protocols, and clindex for classes.
@end ignore

@ifinfo
@format
* gstep-base::                      The GNUstep Base Library
@end format
@end ifinfo

@c set the vars GNUSTEP-BASE-VERSION and GCC-VERSION
@include version.texi

@ifinfo
This file documents the features and implementation of The GNUstep 
Base Library.


Copyright (C) 1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' is included exactly as
in the original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' and
this permission notice may be included in translations approved by the
Free Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
@end ifinfo

@iftex
@finalout
@c @smallbook
@c @cropmarks
@end iftex

@setchapternewpage odd

@titlepage
@title User's Guide to the
@title GNUstep Base Library
@sp 3
@subtitle Version @value{GNUSTEP-BASE-VERSION}
@author Adam Fedor (fedor@@gnu.org)
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.


Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU Library General Public License'' is included exactly as
in the original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU Library General Public License'' may be
included in a translation approved by the author instead of in the original
English.

@end titlepage

@node Top, Overview, (dir), (dir)
@top gstep-base

This manual documents some configuration and installation issues
with the GNUstep Base Library and also differences between the Base
Library and libraries that implement the OpenStep Foundation specification
and the MacOS-X Foundation implementation.

@menu
* Overview::                    
* Implementation::              
@end menu

@node Overview, Implementation, Top, Top
@chapter Overview

*The GNUstep Base Library (gstep-base) requires the GNUstep Makefile
Package (gstep-make) to compile. A recent GCC compiler may also be
needed as well as other libraries. You should consult the
@file{GNUstep-HOWTO} document that comes with the GNUstep Core Libraries
package (gstep-core) or information on supported machines on the web
site @url{http://www.gnustep.org/information}.

Documentation for individual classes is included in gsdoc (and html) format
in the gsdoc directory.

@node Implementation,  , Overview, Top
@chapter Implementation Details

@menu
* Memory Management::           
* Memory Allocation::           
* Reference Counting::          
@end menu

@node Memory Management, Memory Allocation, Implementation, Implementation
@section Memory Management

The OpenStep standard defines an reference-count based memory management scheme which the GNUstep libraries support.  GNUstep also supports garbage collection
using the Boehm conservative garbage collecting library, though this is
currently (October 1999) in a pre-alpha state.

@node Memory Allocation, Reference Counting, Memory Management, Implementation
@section Memory Allocation

Normally, memory is allocated in zones.  Most memory is allocated from a
default area (returned by the NSDefaultMallocZone()) function.  In  some cases
where you want to ensure that a group of objects are all located in roughly the
same area of memory (for performance reasons) you might create a special zone
large enough to accomodate the objects you wish to create, and allocate the
objects from that area.  This will minimise the paging that your application
needs to do in accessing those objects frequently. With the low price of RAM
in modern systems, paging is likely to be much less of a problem nowadays, and
the need for zoning memory is much lower than it used to be.

At a low-level, memory allocation is performed by two functions -
NSAllocateObject() and NSDeallocateObject(), but you need never normally deal
with these functions - they are there for when you need an unusual degree of
control or performance.  These are the functions called by
[NSObject +allocWithZone:] and [NSObject -dealloc].  If you call
NSAllocateObject() directly to create an instance of a class, you may break
some functionality of that class (such as caching of frequently used objects).

Generally, objects are created using the methods +alloc, -copy, -mutableCopy
and are destroyed using -dealloc.  The allocation methods are covers for the
more versatile +allocWithZone:, -copyWithZone: and -mutableCopyWithZone:
methods (which specify the zone from which the memory is to be allocated,
rather than forcing you to use the default zone).
NSObject also provides +new, which is simply a cover for the
combination of a +alloc and a -init.

The -dealloc method returns the memory occupied by the object to the zone from
which it was originally allocated, it can use the -zone method to determine
which zone this is.

Explicit memory allocation and deallocation is efficient - but when you pass
objects around inside a program (and especially from/to libraries etc) it
quickly becomes difficult and/or inefficient to keep track of who owns an
object and should be responsible for calling it's deallocation method.

To take this problem away, some mechanism is needed.  The OpenStep specification
provides a reference counting mechanism along with a set of conventions that
make memory management easy.  In addition to this, the GNU Objective-C compiler
and the GNUstep system provide a memory sweeping garbage collection mechanism
(using the Boehm conservative garbage collection library).

@node Reference Counting,  , Memory Allocation, Implementation
@section Reference Counting

The reference counting scheme for object allocation/deallocation is quite
simple.  Objects are normally created with a reference count of 1.  An objects
reference count may be increased by callsing -retain, and decreased by calling
-release.  If a -release would make the reference count become zero, the
-dealloc method is automatically called to destroy the object - freeing its
memory.

This simple scheme then becomes more complicated with the addition of
the -autorelease method.  When -autorelease is called for an object, the
object is added to the currently active autorelease pool.  When the autorelease
pool is later destroyed, every object in the pool will have a -release message
sent to it for each time it was added to the pool.  Thus, sending an
-autorelease method to an object is equivalent to sending a -release at some
future point.

In general, when a method (other than the alloc..., copy..., mutableCopy...
and new... methods) returns an object, that object will have been autoreleased,
so you don't need to worry about releasing it yourself.  However, if you wish
to store the object for any length of time, you will need to send it a retain
message, and then send it a release when you have finished with it.


@bye
