@ifclear GSTEP-BASE-MAIN
@include version.texi
@end ifclear

@ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY
@chapter News

The currently released version of the library is
@samp{@value{GNUSTEP-BASE-VERSION}}.

See the @url{ReleaseNotes.html} document for more information.
@end ifclear

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.27.0}

Aside from an assortment of bugfixes, this release includes a lot of
improvements for Android support as well as numerous new classes and methods.

@itemize @bullet
@item Expose GNU TLS wrappers and add methods to get certificate expiry.
@item Improve thread safety when using zombies, particularly on statup/shutdown.
@item Improvements for Ukrainian localization.
@item Decreased ICU requirements to 49 to support Windows 2000.
@item Simplifications and fixes in GSPrivateSymbolPath().
@item GSMime improvements (word encoding specifier, utf-8 improvements encoding
quoted words with multibyte characters)
@item NSJSONSerialization fixes for codepoints over 0x7f.
@item NSCharacterSet support for URL*AllowedCharacterSet and declarations for
new character sets.
@item NSString implementations for new methods stringByRemovingPercentEncoding/
stringByAddingPercentEncodingWithAllowedCharacterSet:.
@item Fixed a crash in gdomap when an invalid hostname is given for the -M
option.
@item In NSString.m, removed functions urldecode() and ishex() which were
mistakenly neither namespaced nor declared static and thus could have conflicted
with non-library code.
@item Fixed libdispatch configuration switch so --enable-libdispatch works
correctly; correctly checking for HAVE_LIBDISPATCH_RUNLOOP.
@item Updated libdispatch runloop integration so it is compatible with Swift's
corelibs libdispatch release (from github.com/apple/swift-corelibs-libdispatch).
The libdispatch must be compiled with INSTALL_PRIVATE_HEADERS=YES.
@item In NSThread, spinlocks implemented using builtins to be able to target
platforms without pthread_spin_lock(), such as Android targeting API level < 24.
@item In NSLog on Android, send logs to syslog.
@item Implementation of NSOrderedSet.
@item When ./configuring, link against libandroid on Android.
@item In NSBundle, allow integrating with Android asset manager using +[NSBundle
setJavaAssetManager:withJNIEnv:], enabling use of mainBundle's
pathForResource:ofType:, -URLForResource:ofType: and similar; referencing
Info.plist if it exists in Android assets; use of NSFileManager's
fileExistsAtPath: et al and isReadableFileAtPath:; reading files using
NSFileHandle APIs; use of NSDirectoryEnumerator to enumerate Android assets from
the main bundle.
@item In NSBundle, localization support on Android.
@item In NSProcessInfo, automatic initialization on Android using a fake
executable path (/data/data/<app identifier>/Resources).
@item In NSData, improvements in reading Android assets.
@item Various improvements in the mechanism to report memory usage of individual
objects.
@item Skeletal implementation of NSUbiquitousKeyValueStore.
@item Implementation of NSByteCountFormatter.
@item Fixes to writing large HTTPS requests (GSSocketStream, NSURLProtocol).
@item In gdomap.c, fix detection of local networks.
@item In NSArray's -removeObjectsInArray:, prevent some crashes.
@item In GSTLS, avoid setting session priority twice.
@item In NSFileHandle, fix so that setting certificate information does not
discard any other options already set.
@item In GSXML's -fatalErrorFunction, use the correct function to get the line
number.
@item In NSOperation's _execute, ensure lock gets released on an error by
surrounding with NS_DURING.
@item Generics support in NSHashTable.
@item Implementation of NSProgress.
@item Skeleton implementation of NSURLComponents.
@item In NSSortDescriptor, added -sortDescriptorWithKey:ascending:descending:.
@item In NSOperationQueue, added -addOperationWithBlock.
@item In NSFileManager, added
-URLForDirectory:inDomain:appropriateForURL:create:error: and
-enumeratorAtURL:includingPropertiesForKeys:options:errorHandler:. Also added
NSItemReplacementDirectory constant, and updated stub implementation for
-URLForDirectory:shouldCreate:error:. Added -initWithDirectoryPath:... with
additional parameters skipHidden and errorHandler.
@item In NSDictionary, fixed keysSortedByValueUsingComparator:.
@item Moved NSFileWrapper from -gui to -base.
@item Added NSFilePresenter, NSFileVersion and NSFileCoordinator.
@item Added NSPersonComponents and NSPersonNameComponentsFormatter.
@item Added units of measurement classes such as NSUnit, NSMeasurement,
NSMeasurementFormatter, NSEnergyFormatter, NSLengthFormatter,
NSMassFormatter.
@item In NSUnit, support for NSUnitArea, NSUnitConcentrationMass,
NSUnitDispersion, NSUnitElectricCharge, NSUnitIlluminance,
NSUnitElectricCurrent, NSUnitElectricPotentionDifference, NSElectricResistance,
NSUnitMass, NSUnitEnergy, NSUnitFrequency, NSUnitPower, NSUnitSpeed,
NSUnitFuelEfficiency, NSUnitPressure, NSUnitVolume, NSUnitLength.
@item Support for data directory on Android introduces
GSInitializeProcessAndroid and makes use of the path returned by
Context.getFilesDir() as the basis for storing data (e.g. NSUserDefaults) and
when querying for directory paths (NSLibraryDirectory,
NSApplicationSupportDirectory, etc.).
@item Placeholder NSScript* classes. Added NSUserActivity, NSObjectScripting,
NSHFSFileTypes, NSAppleEventManager and NSAppleEventDescriptor.
@item Added NSDateInterval intersectionWithDateInterval:.
@item Added NSBackgroundActivityScheduler.
@item Added NSISO8601DateFormatter and NSMetadataAttributes.
@item Added NSOrtogrpahy and NSLinguisticTagger.
@item Added NSExtensionItem, NSExtensionContext, NSExtensionRequestHandling, and
NSItemProvider and NSItemProviderReadingWriting.
@item Updated timezone info for NSTimeZones.
@item On Android, support for NSTemporaryDirectory to use Context.getCacheDir(),
and cleaning it up in GSInitializeProcessAndroid() given there is no support for
temp directory before Android API 26. Also used with NSCachesDirectory +
NSUserDomainMask.
@item NSXPCConnection fixes.
@item NSException symbolication support using libunwind (used when backtrace()
is unavailable).
@item Travis build improvements to use new runloop integration and gnustep-2.0
runtime.
@item In NSKeyValueObserving, implement two missing methods for NSArray:
-addObserver:options:context: and
-removeObserver:fromObjectsAtIndexes:forKeyPath:.
@item Updated NSUUID to use instancetype.
@item Added support for NSDate constants in NSPredicate.
@item Fixed a NSTimer bug with blocks.
@item In GSTLS, do not put password in the hash key of the credentials, and to
avoid logging it when debugging is on.
@item Improvements in NSConcreteHashTable and NSConcreteMapTable.
@item In various places, switch away from deprecated CREATE_AUTORELEASE_POOL()
to use the ARC-compatible ENTER_POOL and LEAVE_POOL macros.
@item When building the list of hosts to be probed to see if they have gdomap
servers, fix code to include those explicitly defined in the config file.
Add -S option to list the addresses of the known gdomap servers.
@item Backward compatibility fix for ICU 65.
@item Update GSPrivateSymbolPath() so that, on the path where LINKER_GETSYMBOL
is not available, we attempt to lookup classes using the prefix ._OBJC_CLASS_
for the 2.0 ABI (earlier ABIs use a prefix of __objc_class_name_ for the class
definition.
@item Fix parsing of NSURLResponse content type header.
@item Fix for class lookup when using the 2.0 ABI.
@item Fixed NSURLComponents setURL: throwing exceptions when URL didn't have
all expected parts caused by rangeOfString: throwing for nil values.
@item Added NSURLQueryItem implementation.
@end itemize

@ifclear ANNOUNCE-ONLY
@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.26.0}
@itemize @bullet
@item Improve utf8 validity checks.
@item Make point and size subclasses for NSValue interchangable.
@item Add support for TLS SNI. Always request certificate from client
and update certificates after 5 minutes.
@item Don't write deprecated fields to desktop link file.
@item Use NSLock instead of GSLazyLock and other improvements for
multithreaded processes.
@item Clean up of NSString cluster.
@item Update NSAssert() and NSCAssert() to handle variable arguments
(as OSX has done) and mark the numbered macros as obsolete.
@item Various improvements in tests.
@item Require ICU >= 50.
@item ICU is now detected using pkg-config.
@item Improve XML parsing.
@item Make NSXMLNode ivar a union representing different types, instead of
assuming it will contain different underlying class types in different
contexts. This is important for the new libobjc2 ABI.
@item OSX compatibility changes to NSURL.
@item NSFileManager call error handle on missing file.
@item Dummy spinlock implementation for platforms that don't support it.
@item Internationalization improvements: Japanese translation, Turkish
translation, Polish translation.
@item Various improvements for new libobjc2 "v2 ABI", including things like
a new NSConstantString implementation, making GS_REPLACE_CONSTANT_STRING
a noop with the new ABI, etc.
@item Improvements for stack traces, exception handling and dead lock
detection.
@item Other more minor bugfixes and cleanups. Many found by Coverity
scan results.
@item As usual, this release also contains an update to include the
most recent international timezone data.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.25.1}
@itemize @bullet
@item Unicode fixes for characters outside the base plane
@item Stubs for some new OSX methods
@item Various new OSX compatibility macro and type definitions
@item NSFileManager fixes and tweaks to match OSX implementation
@item NSDistributedLock bugfix for pre-existing lock directories
@item Alternative sort algorithms selectable at runtime
@item Compatibility-related changes for environments not supporting weak symbols
@item Other more minor bugfixes and cleanups.
@item As usual, this release also contains an update to include the
most recent international timezone data.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.25.0}
@itemize @bullet
@item Garbage collection support removed (NSGarbageCollector stub remains)
@item Support for Debian style multi-architecture installations added
@item OpenSSL bundle removed since it didn't match GNUTLS support
@item Ported to Debian/Hurd
@item ICU string (regexp in particular) fixes
@item OSX compatibity changes in NSRunLoop and NSTask behavior
@item Alternative sort algorithms selectable at runtime
@item Many bugfixes and cleanups.
@item As usual, this release also contains an update to include the
most recent international timezone data.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.24.9}
@itemize @bullet
@item Niels added support for generics
@item Support for 'ng' runtime library (latest language features enabled)
@item Performance optimisations and improved diagnostic messages
@item Garbage Collection deprecated (support to be removed)
@item As usual, this release also contains an update to include the
most recent international timezone data.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.24.8}
@itemize @bullet
@item Performance optimisations (particularly in the use of tiny string
objects by the new objc runtime on 64bit systems).
@item Thread naming and logging of threads by NSLog() has been made
consistent with the latest OSX releases, making debugging of
multithreaded code a little easier.
@item Sergei Golovin has added NSURLConnection regression tests (while
fixing a few bugs there).
@item As usual, this release also contains an update to include the
most recent international timezone data.
@item Various other bugfixes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.24.7}

@itemize @bullet
@item TLS and other security improvements (note, SSLv3.0 is disabled by default
in order to prevent the 'POODLE' attack).
@item Latest timezone data included.
@item Various other bugfixes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.24.6}

@itemize @bullet
@item NSUUID implemented
@item New OSX version macros
@item TLS support improvements
@item Various new methods for OSX compatibility
@item Various other bugfixes
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.24.5}

@itemize @bullet
@item NSInvocationOperation
@item OSX version compatibility macro improvements
@item Static analyzer fixes (mostly printf format string issues)
@item Various other bugfixes
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.24.4}

@itemize @bullet
@item Updated time zone data
@item OSX 10.7 NSCalendar methods
@item Portability improvments and minor bugfixes
@item More testcases in the testsuite
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.24.3}

@itemize @bullet
@item Implementation of the NSXML DOM classes
@item Implementation of consistent TLS/SSL support
@item Implementation of new/selectable sorting algorithms
@item More explicit dependencies on external libraries.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.24.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item There is binary incompatibility on 64bit systems in that the value of
the NSNotFound constant there is now 64bits rather than 32bits.
@item gcc-4.0 is the minimum official supported compiler for GNUstep
@item Support for the GNU LANGUAGES environment variable and other locale
improvements
@item IPV6 support for NSHost and networking operations
@item Support for UTF-8 string literals in source (compiler permitting)
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.23.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for automatic reference counting (ARC) when using clasng and
the GNUstep Objective-C 2.0 runtime 1.5 or later.
@item Full support for weak references in NSHashTable, NSMapTable and
NSPointerArray when using clang and the GNUstep Objective-C 2.0 runtime 1.5
or later. 
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.22.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Many updates and new classes
@item There is now a regression test framework included with the package
@item New support for Objective-C 2.0
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.21.1}

This is an (unstable) copy of the 1.20.1 release

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.20.1}

This is a stable bugfix release. There are no major changes or binary
incompatibilities, but this release does include an update of timezone
handling to include the latest zone information.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.21.0}

This is an (unstable) copy of the 1.20.0 release

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.20.0}

This is a stable release. There have been major changes
and reorganizations to support, among other things, the new
non-fragile ABI from clang. These changes, although they
break binary compatibility with previous releases, should allow 
all future releases to maintain compatibility.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.19.3}

@itemize @bullet
@item Bugfix to work around OSX behavior of [NSURL-path]
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.19.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item Various OSX compatibility improvements.
@item String handling performance improvements.
@item Several minor bugfixes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.19.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item New Mac OS X methods for writing data in NSData
@item New classes NSHashTable and NSMapTable
@item Garbage collection now works again and is much improved.
@item Method return types and arguments have been changed for Mac OS X 10.5
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.19.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for native objective-c exceptions
@item Connection keepalive for ms-windows
@item Path utitlites fix for ms-windows
@item Changes to build on 64bit ms-windows
@item Support for @@synchronize
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.15.3}

@itemize @bullet
@item Extended NSUserDefaults so it recognizes ../ as a relative path.
@item Added TLS/SSL support for NSStream based on GNU TLS
@item Added support for https to NSURLConnection using new stream code and
added basic support for digest authentication.
@item Fixed various problems with and added new options to KVO.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.15.2}
Bug fixes include improved thread safety (and a change to the NSThread
class structure) and Key-Value observing.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.15.1}

This is an unstable release. There may be API and ABI changes 
from previous releases. The licesne hase changed to GPLv3 and LGPLv3.
Mostly bug fixes, but a few improvements in NSPredicates and Key-Value
coding have been added.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.15.0}

This is an unstable release from 1.14.0.  It is otherwise
identical to the 1.14.0 release. Releases in the 1.15 series
may not be forward compatible with previous 1.15 releases.
 
@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.14.0}

Many portability (particularly for ms-windows) and MacOS-X compatibility fixes.
New MacOS-X classes and incorporation of NSAffineTransform and NSSpellServer
which were formerly in the gui library.
Improved performance of amssively multithreaded programs.


@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.13.1}

Various minor bugs and MacOS-X incompatibilities fixed.
One important fix for a possible buffer overrun attack when
initialising NSDate objects from strings.
One fix for a serious (crash) bug when initialising the bundles
system in an application which has a lot of frameworks linked to it.
See the release notes for more details.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.13.0}

Several sets of classes have been added for dealing with urls and
predicates. A few minor api changes have occured as well.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.12.0}

There have been a number of API changes and several
methods have been depreciated in this release. Although
current GNUstep programs that use these methods will still
work in this version, there are enough changes that a new
library version was considered useful. See the release notes for more
details.

New NSStream classes where added to the library.

User defaults were restructured to create the defaults
lazily and can be set to not write to an external file at
all, for developers who wish to use the library as a
stand-alone library or in other situations where using
external resources is not desired.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.11.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item Support for GNUstep.conf and relocation of the filesystem is 
much improved in this release.
@item The WM_QUIT message is now intercepted to allow an application to
terminate cleanly.
@item NSMessagePort was implemented on Windows platforms.
@item Deprecated support for system-wide GNUsteprc files has been removed.
@item Some support for keeping user defaults in the Windows registry 
implemented.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.11.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item New Cocoa class NSSortDescriptor
@item NSStringFrom... functions now output strings that can
be read by old OpenStep implementations (but can also still be read
by GNUstep and MacOSX).
@item More support for debugging on mingw, including writing logs to 
debugger and event viewer.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.11.0}

This release is binary incompatible with previous releases.
The interface version of the library has changed so that apps, tools
and libraries that use the base library need to be recompiled to use
this new version.

@itemize @bullet
@item Window's path handling has changed to use native paths throughout.
@item Startup/configuration of the libraries no longer requires environement
variables.
@item Character sets are included in the library rather than being read from 
data files.
@item NSRunLoop and related classes use natvie win32 event handling on
Windows machines.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.10.3}

This version includes a few minor bug fixes.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.10.2}

This version mostly includes minor fixes and updates.

@itemize @bullet
@item The definition of NSContainsRect has changed to correspond with the
current Mac OS X/Cocoa def - the sides of the bRect can touch aRect.
@item Add support for systems that support unichar file paths (e.g. Windows).
@item Use a proper one-to-one abbreviation dictionary for NSTimeZone.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.10.1}

This version mostly includes minor fixes and updates.

@itemize @bullet
@item Runtime discovery of the library version is possible.
@item NSXMLParser class added. Not completely implemented.
@item NSArrays makeObjectsPerformSelector iterates in same order as MacOS X.
@item Designated initializers for NSArray, NSDictionary, NSSet, and NSString
have been changed for MacOS X compatibility.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.10.0}

Note the interface version of the library has changed so that apps, tools
and libraries the use the base library need to be recompiled to use it.

@itemize @bullet
@item A large majority of the library classes have been documented thanks to 
the efforts of Adrian Robert
@item URL classes support persistant connections
@item Mac OSX XML compatibility fixes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.9.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item GSMime parsing ignores extraneous data
@item New log functions GSOnceFlag and GSOnceMLog
@item New class NSError
@item Multiple new function in GSObjCRuntime
@item NSProtocolChecker rewritten
@item autogsdoc support added for building frames
@item Binary incompatibility:  NSUnarchiver, GSIMapTable have new ivars added
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.9.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item Default string encoding taken from system nl_langinfo if not set
with GNUSTEP_STRING_ENCODING.
@item NSKeyedArchiver/NSKeyedUnarchiver classes added.
@item NSPropertyLists class added, also decodes Mac OS X binary propery lists.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.9.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Lazy locking implemented (see GSLock documentation)
@item MacOSX PB files updated to 10.3
@item DO retain/release implementation simplified and also handles some
complex DO retain/release problems.
@item GNUSTEP_STRING_ENCODING now supports any valid iconv name.
@item gdomap uid/gid fixes
@item NSString subclass heirarchy reorganized to fix problems with copying
and ownership of data.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.8.0}

Read the NEWS file for a complete list of changes since the last stable
version. The major change is that the header files (both in the
package and when installed) are in different locations. Also, due to 
filesystem changes in gnustep-make, several components of gnustep-base
are located in different locations. Generally this should not affect the
compilation or running of applications and tools.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.7.4}

@itemize @bullet
@item Added Korean encoding
@item Updated use of ObjCRuntime functions.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.7.3}

Note in this version there have been large changes to the location of
header files (both in the package and when installed). It's possible
(though unlikely) that certain applications that rely on GNUstep specific
headers may not compile because of this.

@itemize @bullet
@item A number of Protocol and DO fixes.
@item New TraditionalChinese language.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.7.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item NSUndoManager improvements 
@item New NSMessagePort implementation.
@item Private GSTcpPort becomre NSSocketPort.
@item Improvements to handle selectors better over remote connections.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.7.1}

Bug fixes.

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.7.0}

See gnustep-make for comments on the filesystem change. Some components
of gnustep-base are now stored in different directories and in some cases
you should use different methods to look for them. Use
+pathForLibraryResource:ofType:inDirectory: instead of
+pathForGNUstepResource:. Also try using +bundleForLibrary:.

gnustep-base is now documentated as OpenStep complient. Other changes:

@itemize @bullet
@item Add GSApplicationSupportDirectory for 
NSSearchPathForDirectoriesInDomains.
@item Added man page for gdomap
@end itemize


@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.6.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item More MinGW support
@item New MacOSX compatible methods.
@item The Base Additions library compiles on native OSX.
@item autogsdoc produces better, cleaner docs.
@item Built-in garbage collecting classes.
@item Any many many bug fixes and minor improvements.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.5.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item Port NSThread to MingW
@item Better framework support in NSBundle
@item Added Thai string encodings.
@item New makeImmutableCopyOnFail: method.
@item Lots of autogsdoc improvements, Updated gsdoc DTD to 1.0 version.
@item Added GSPrintf for logging to stdout.
@item Warning logs selectable at runtime.
@item NSTimeZone code rewritten for speed.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.5.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item New MacOSX methods implemented (NSString, NSArray, NSObject)
@item Fixed bug that occationally deleted user defaults.
@item Tcp connections use runloop in NSConnectionReplyMode.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.4.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item gdomap - security bug fixes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.3.4}

This is a first pre-release version for 1.4.

This version also fixes a potentially destructive bug in gdomap. All
users are urged to upgrade to this version as soon as possible.

@itemize @bullet
@item gdomap - don't write pidfile until after setuid away from root
@item New combined Unix/Windows version of NSFileHandle
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.3.3}

Note there are interface and binary changes in this release that
require you to recompile all applications and tools that use gnustep-base.

@itemize @bullet
@item Rewrite of NSURL (NOTE: Requires recompilation of all apps!)
@item NSMapTable fix (also requires recompilation).
@item Hack to avoid bug in gcc 3.1
@item MacOSX compatibility changes: -dealloc, NSLog
@item Add NSZombie class.
@item GC improvements
@item Support for system-wide .GNUsteprc
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.3.2}

@itemize @bullet
@item Corrections for handling Windows file paths, etc
@item Other fixes for Windows - DO now works on Windows
@item New localization/internationalization tool make_strings
@item Experimental libffi support.
@item Handle running tools/apps on other hosts
@item Updated files and new tool for handling different encodings (cvtenc).
@item Unicode and UTF8 handling improvements.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.3.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Moved additional classes into subprojects and/or bundles to make it
easier to port these to other Foundation libraries..
@item Traditional Chinese extensions added.
@item Better support for resources (bundles)
@item Ports and DO work on MingW.
@item Better KeyValueCoding support (for EOF).
@item New, partially finished Objective-C/Foundation programming manual.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.1.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Removed use of distributed lock to sync defaults file.
@item Compiles on Darwin (but does not work yet).
@item New tool autogsdoc for inline Objective-C documentation.
@item Some NSBundle convienience methods for associating resources with
libraries and tools (like a lightweight framework).
@item URL classes improved and more robust.
@item SSL classes compiled as a separate bundle due to license problems.
@item Better operation in MinGW environment.
@item New localization files.
@item XML property lists
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.0.2}

Mostly a bug fix release to work with the new gcc 3.0.

@itemize @bullet
@item Added support for special gcc 3.0 options (constant string support).
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.0.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item Many fixes to work better with Darwin (still not there).
@item Fixes to work with BSD Unix
@item Added some missing methods, better conformance to MacOSX Docs.
@item Added support for invoking super implementation (mostly for writting
bridges from other languages).
@item Works better with gcc 3.x, newer kernels.
@item More memory debugging support.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{1.0.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Fix parsing of arguments for new linux kernels.
@item File manager and other fixes for mingw
@item Fix alignment issues on CPUs that require it.
@item Update unicode support and fixes
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item New MacOSX compatible files for NSCalendarDate, NSTimeZone
@item NSUserDefaults now uses NSLanguages not Languages
@item Various improvements for Windows platforms
@item NSCharacterSets updated to v3.0.1 of Unicode data.
@item Added some gettext compatible localization macros.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.1}

@itemize @bullet
@item Fixes for building on FreeBSD
@item Unicode support for -initWithFormat:
@item NSDate pass dates over DO bycopy unless explicit byref.
@item Updated for Makefile package changes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.9.0}

@itemize @bullet
@item Workaround when no host IP set.
@item Standardized non-NS filenames
@item Lots of code simplifications and standardization.
@item Added key/value methods to NSObject.
@item Updated DO and NSInvocation to use ffcall libraries.
@item New GSHTTPURLHandle class for http and https support.
@item New GSMime class for MIME parsing
@item Made DO threadsafe.
@item Added extension to NSThread to allow JIGS to map java threads to gnustep threads.
@item Modifications to make it easier to port to Apple runtime.
@item Added framework support to NSBundle
@item Added localization support
@item Better unicode conversion.
@item New NSNull class.
@item Major rewrite of NSString
@item Port to MinGW/Windows
@item Removed obsolete classes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.6.6}

@itemize @bullet
@item Lots of new documentation.
@item Completely rewritten Distributed Object to be much more compatible with 
the MacOS-X API (and incidentally, closer to the original OpenStep standard). 
@item Support to compile library as a DLL on Windows (still cygwin only).
@item Removed lots of obsolete classes.
@item New tools for handling property lists.
@item More optimization of classes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.6.5}

@itemize @bullet
@item Better debugging information.
@item Timezone information rewritten to work more like GNUstep wants it
rather than strict Posix.
@item Added support for FreeBSD native POSIX threads
@item Better garbage collection support.
@item Lots of optimizations and bug fixes.
@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.6.0}

Most of the changes to the Base Library are bug fixes and updates to
include MacOS-X specifications. Although the base library hasn't been
extensively tested, it is currently used in several commercial products
and installations, and is considered to be fairly stable.

@itemize @bullet

@item Some changes to eventually allow the use of automatic garbage
collection.

@item Better localization support in NSBundle.

@item Performance boosts in many classes.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.5.5}

Too many changes to mention in detail, but here is a list of a few:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Many base classes have been rewritten with tonnes of performance
improvements that in many cases make it as fast as or faster than the
NeXT implementation.

@item
DO and archiving has received many improvements that help it work on a
variety of different platforms.

@item
Configuration and compilation has been greatly improved and fool
proofed.

@item
There are several new tools for handling services, defaults, and
pasteboards. 

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.5.1}

@itemize @bullet

@item Additional runtime functions for interaction with Guile and
ObjC-Guile library.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.5.0}

@itemize @bullet

@item Improvements to the NSInvocation class, from  Masatake Yamato  
@email{masata-y@@aist-nara.ac.jp}.

@item Implemented several new OpenStep methods and classes (e.g. NSTask)
and speed improvements for others (NSArray, NSData, NSString),
from  Richard Frith-Macdonald  @email{richard@@brainstorm.co.uk}.

@item gdomap now handles subnet addressing and machines with multiple
IP addresses
from  Richard Frith-Macdonald  @email{richard@@brainstorm.co.uk}.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.4.0}

@itemize @bullet

@item New tools for maintaining the defaults database.

@item Use the new GNUstep Makefile Package to compile the library, tools
checks, and everything else.

@item An implementation of NSDistributedLock

@item NSData implemented as a class cluster including a class to
allocate shared VM memory.

@item Big NSTimeZone improvements, as well as inclusion of time zone files,
from Yoo C. Chung  @email{wacko@@laplace.snu.ac.kr}.

@item Major improvements to distributed objects and many related clases
from Richard Frith-Macdonald @email{richard@@brainstorm.co.uk}. Also added a
nameserver.

@item Major rewrite of NSString, include Unicode strings from Stevo
Crvenkovski  @email{stevo@@btinternet.com} 

@item A rewrite of the NSBundle class from Adam Fedor @email{fedor@@gnu.org}

@item Addition of a C-language style stream package.

@item Better support for threads and locking.

@item Support for running on Windows from Scott Christley
@email{scottc@@net-community.com} 

@item Many, many, many, many bug fixes and new classes. 

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes since version @samp{0.1.19}

@itemize @bullet

@item The library has changed its name from @samp{libobjects} to
@samp{libgnustep-base}.  The Apr 17 ChangeLog entry contains a list of
the way various other names were changed.

@item The library now requires a patch to gcc-2.7.2.  The patch adds
thread-safe features to the GNU Objective C runtime.  Each thread has
its own exception handler and assertion handler, thanks to Yoo C. Chung
@email{wacko@@power1.snu.ac.kr}.

@item Distributed Objects is much improved.  Exceptions in the server
are sent back to the client.  Ungracefully closed connections are
gracefully handled.

@item NSUserDefaults has been implemented, thanks to Georg Tuparev
@email{tuparev@@NMR.EMBL-Heidelberg.DE}.

@item NSScanner has been implemented, thanks to Eric Norum
@email{Eric.Norum@@usask.ca}.

@item NSCharacterSet has a new caching scheme, and is now faster than
NeXT's implementation, thanks to Adam Fedor.

@item Preliminary thread-safety work has been done.  NSObject and
NSAutoreleasePool should be thread-safe.

@item The "%@@" printf directive now works on systems without GNU libc.

@item The NS*Page* functions have been implemented.

@item The mframe and behavior functions have been overhauled and
better commented.

@item The NSHashTable and NSMapTable functions have been implemented,
thanks to Albin Jones @email{albin.jones@@dartmouth.edu}.  Albin has also
implemented underlying GNU functions that provide functions for arrays
and linked lists of C-type variables.

@item The NSThread class has been implemented.  Thanks to Scott
Christley @email{scottc@@net-community.com}, the NSLock class has been
implemented.

@item A RunLoop class has been implemented, and is used for listening to
Port objects.  It is used for Distributed Objects.  There is also an
NSRunLoop class based on RunLoop.

@item The NSTimer class has been implemented, although its use with
RunLoops is currently disabled.

@item The Notification mechanism has been implemented.  It makes good
use of hash tables and linked lists in order to be fast.

@item The Invocation class heirarchy has been fleshed out and now
works. 

@item The collection classes have been overhauled to better handle
distributed objects, and for better compatibility with NeXT's method
names.  

A new separation has been made in the abstract collection
classes: IndexedCollections contain objects accessible by an integer
key, but the user cannot insert at an arbitrary key; these are useful
for sorted collections, such as SplayTree's. OrderedCollection can have
their order determined by the user; i.e. users can send
@samp{-insertObject:atIndex:}, etc.

There is a new set of rich enumeration methods based on Invocations.

@item Port class heirarchy has been overhauled.  There are now classes
for TCP ports, UDP ports, and Mach ports.  Only the TCP ports are
currently functional.

@item GNU-style archiving has had an overhaul, and the GNUstep
NSArchiver class is functional, but not strongly tested.  It does not
yet call -awakeUsingCoder:.

I have separated the high-level archiving of groups of objects from the
low-level format of how C-types are written.  There are several new
classes.  CStream is a subclass of Stream that knows how to encode
C-type variables in a machine independent way; this class has two
concrete subclasses: BinaryCStream, and TextCStream.  Plug these
backends into Coder to get different style low-level formats for
archiving.

Floats and doubles are now encoded more efficiently.

NSArchiver is built on top of Coder.  You can actually send all the
Coder methods to NSArchiver and vice-versa.

GNU classes BinaryCoder and TextCoder are gone.

@item Several new OpenStep functions have been implemented:
NSHomeDirectory, NSUserName, NSHomeDirectoryForUser, NSPageSize,
NSLogPageSize, NSroundUpToMultipleOfPageSize,
NSRoundDownToMultipleOfPageSize, NSRealMemoryAvailable,
NSAllocateMemoryPages, NSDeallocateMemoryPages, NSCopyMemoryPages.

@item ...and many bug fixes.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes since version @samp{0.1.14}

@itemize @bullet

@item Can be made as a shared library by passing @samp{--enabled-shared} to
`configure'.  Thanks to Jan Kybic @email{kybic@@earn.cvut.cz} and Bryan Headley
@email{bwh@@mail.lnd.coretech.com} for suggestions.

@item New classes NSSet, NSMutableSet, NSCountedSet.  New concrete
classes NSGSet, NSGMutableSet, NSGCountedSet.  New test program nsset.m.
New class NSMethodSignature.

@item Running './configure' and building the library in a different
directory than the source works as it should, according to the GNU
standards. 

@item Dynamic loading fixes for Solaris, thanks to Adam Fedor.

@item Fixes to Coder correct bugs with encoding/decoding wildly
interconnected objects.  (My application uses a "Suffix Tree" structure:
a Tree, and a LinkedList that winds its way through the leaves of the
tree; the LinkedList nodes also have pointers back to the tree nodes.)

@item NSTimeZone implemented, thanks to Peter Burka
@email{peter@@bert.psyc.upei.ca}

@item NSData fixes, thanks to Adam Fedor.

@item NSObjCRuntime functions implemented.  NSObject description methods
implemented.

@item Bug fixes in NSString, NSDictionary, NSArray, NSGeometry and other
places. 

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes since version @samp{0.1.13}

@itemize @bullet

@item NSProcessInfo class, thanks to Georg Tuparev.

@item NSDate now more operational, thanks to Jeremy Bettis.

@item Autorelease checking improved, thanks to Adam Fedor.

@item NSString concrete classes now more configurable.  Several new
methods implemented.

@item Many bug fixes.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes since version @samp{0.1.12}

@itemize @bullet

@item Bug fixes: installation; NSArray and NSDictionary copying;
NSArray, NSDictionary, NSData, NSArchiver, NSUnarchiver concrete class
configurability; NSString -getCharacter:range:. See the ChangeLog for
more details.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes since version @samp{0.1.10}

@itemize @bullet

@item Now using @file{src}, @file{config} and @file{doc} directories to
un-clutter the top-level directory.

@item
New GNUStep classes implemented: NSDictionary, NSMutableDictionary;
concrete classes NSGDictionary, NSGMutableDictionary; enumeration
classes NSGDictionaryKeyEnumerator, NSGDictionaryObjectEnumerator.

@item
More methods in NSData are implemented, thanks to Albin Jones.

@item
More methods in NSString are implemented; we have new classes
NSCharacterSet and NSBitmapCharSet; all thanks to Adam Fedor.

@item
And several bug fixes.  See the ChangeLog for details.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes since version @samp{0.1.9}

@itemize @bullet

@item
Renamed "foundation" include file directory to "Foundation", in
accordance with OpenStep.

@item
Several bug fixes, including a problem with a missing file in 0.1.9.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes since version @samp{0.1.8}

@itemize @bullet

@item
Many new GNUStep classes: NSEnumerator, NSArrayEnumerator, NSCoder,
NSArchiver, NSUnarchiver, NSData, NSMutableData, NSGCoder, NSGArchiver,
NSGUnarchiver, NSGData, NSGMutableData.  Much coding and prep work has
been done to make archiving work (see the ChangeLog), but it's not quite
ready for action yet.

@item
New GNUStep classes implemented by others: Thanks to Adam Fedor,
NSAssertionHandler.  Thanks to Jeremy Bettis, NSDate.

@item
Overhauled encoding and decoding.  The Coder now sends -initWithCoder by
default, but will still send the more flexible +newWithCoder if the
class implements it.  See objects/Coding.h.  The Stream class interface
has been changed slightly.  There are two new protocols for Streams.

@item
Several new debug-aiding methods implemented in NSAutoreleasePool.

@item
Separated Constant Collection protocols from changeable ones.
Eventually I'll separate the classes too.

@item
Included an outline for the GNU Objective C Language Manual.  The GNU
project is looking for volunteers to help flesh it out.  Send email to
Martin Michlmayr @email{tbm@@ihq.com} or Andrew McCallum
@email{mccallum@@gnu.ai.mit.edu}.

@item
Include the AUTHORS file, needed for legal reasons.  Include the
@file{GNUStep-volunteers} file.

@item
Several bug fixes:  Typo in Array.m; Linux header file frobbing in
NSZone.h; typo causing crash in checks/nsarray.m; bad deallocation in
Collection.m; typo in BinaryTree.m; put -write: and -read:
implementations back in Collection.m.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes since version @samp{0.1.7}

@itemize @bullet

@item
Thanks to Adam Fedor @email{fedor@@boulder.colorado.edu}, classes NSBundle,
NSNumber and NSValue are now operational.  He also provided stubs for
NSArray, NSCoder and NSDictionary.  

@item
NSArray has been fleshed out.  There are new classes NSConcreteArray and
NSConcreteMutableArray.  Basic operations with the NSArray class cluster
now work, and it is set up to coexist nicely with the GNU collection
heirarchy.  Next I'll do NSDictionary in a similar style.

@item
From Adam Fedor, there is a new patch to the gcc Objective C runtime
that aids dynamic linking.  You'll have to apply this patch and
reinstall the runtime before you can compile this version of libgnustep-base.

@item
Several bug fixes, including two serious ones in Collection deallocation
and behavior adding.  See the ChangeLog for details.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes since version @samp{0.1.5}

@itemize @bullet

@item
Better string handling.  NSString is now fleshed out, and I've
implemented a scheme by which the GNU String object and OpenStep's
NSString can coexist nicely.  The OpenStep classes declare their string
arguments with (NSString*) just like the standard says, but the
preferred (more flexible) way to declare string arguments is (id
<String>); and these two types are set up so that they coexist.  There
is still more to be done.  NSString has several unimplemented methods;
GNU String needs some more work.

@item
Newly implemented classes: MallocAddress, NSString, NSMutableString,
NSCString, NSMutableCString.

@item
Thanks to Pieter Schoenmakers @email{tiggr@@es.ele.tue.nl} we have a new
version of the gcc-string.patch that should apply more smoothly.

@item
Thanks to Adam Fedor @email{fedor@@boulder.colorado.edu} for a bug fix to
NXStringTable's.

@item
Thanks to Mark Lakata @email{lakata@@nsdssp.lbl.gov} for a bug fix to NSZone.c.

@ignore
@item
Thanks to Jeremy Bettis @email{jbettis@cse.unl.edu} for implementing NSDate. 
(We're waiting for the assignment paperwork to go through before it's
included in the release.)
@end ignore

@item
Several bug fixes.  Thanks to those who reported them.  Credits are in
the ChangeLog.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes since version @samp{0.1.3}

This release not well tested at all.  We desperately need someone to
write a test suite using dejagnu.  Any volunteers?

I made this release now in order to share the progress that is being
made on GNUSTEP.

@itemize @bullet

@item
New GNUSTEP implementations: NSObject, NSAutoreleasePool, NSZone.
Thanks to Mark Lakata for NSZone.

@item
New GNUSTEP implementations included, but not compiled: NSBundle,
NSException, NSGeometry, NSNumber, NSValue.  Many thanks Adam Fedor.

@item
Many new GNU classes: String classes!  String, MutableString,
ConstantString.  One interesting feature of the GNU string classes is
that that, just like in Smalltalk, they are part of the Collection
heirarchy---all the methods you are used to using on other collections
can be used on these "collections of characters".  You can create
ConstantStrings using the @@"" syntax.

@item Entire library converted to use @code{retain}, @code{release},
@code{autorelease}, @code{dealloc} instead of @code{free}.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes since version @samp{0.1.0}

@itemize @bullet

@item New category: ObjectRetaining.  New classes: AutoreleasePool,
AutoreleaseStack.

@item Bug fixes: Install next-includes properly.  New instructions in
README.ULTRIX.  Time.m patched for Solaris 2.4.  test12.m free fix.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{0.1.0}

@itemize @bullet

@item Renamed the library from @samp{libcoll} to @samp{libgnustep-base}.
(See the end of the file @samp{DISCUSSION} for the background on this
name choice.)  Several file names changed to reflect this.  GNU class
interfaces are now included with @samp{objects} prefix,
e.g. @samp{#include <objects/BinaryTree.h>}.

@item Many new classes. Pseudo-random number classes Random, RNGBerkeley
and RNGAdditiveCongruential.  New stream classes Stream, StdioStream and
MemoryStream.  New coder classes Coder, TextCoder and BinaryCoder.  New
network packet transmission classes Port and SocketPort.  New remote
object messaging classes Connection, Proxy and ConnectedCoder.  New
protocols Coding and Retaining.  New, but unimplemented: Lock and
Locking.  New but soon-to-disapppear: RetainingNotifier,
InvalidationListening.

@item Some bug fixes:  Fixed the assert typo in Storage.m.  The Time
class now compiles under Solaris.  Fixed insertion bug in CircularArray.
NXStringTable_scan.l can now be compiled with lex, not just flex,
(thanks to Adam Fedor @email{adam@@bastille.rmnug.org}).  Properly detect the
difference between gcc running under NEXTSTEP and NeXT's cc.  Using 
autoconf version 2.0.  Renamed DelegateList to DelegatePool.  Renamed
some collection hierarchy methods for better consistency.

@item Some directory reorganization so that NeXT-compatible files can be
included in the standard way, e.g. #include <objc/List.h>.  Some other
NeXT-compatibility improvements: Changed @samp{GNU} prefix to @samp{NX}
in List and HashTable.  New files zone.[hc] containing dummy stubs for
NeXT-compatible zone functions.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{940524}

@itemize @bullet

@item A NeXT-compatible NXStringTable object, thanks to Adam Fedor
@email{adam@@bastille.rmnug.org}.

@item
SplayTree and RBTree classes now operational.  More methods in Time
class implemented.

@item
Some API cleanup:  -delegateListList changed to -delegateListCollection.
-includesSameContents: changed to -contentsEqual:.  -insertObject:atKey:
changed to -putObject:atKey:.  See the ChangeLog for more detail.

@item
Configuration by autoconf in the self-tests directory.  Configuration
script tests GCC nested functions.  Configuration script detects
NEXTSTEP and makes the appropriate adjustments, including skipping the
NeXT-compatibility classes.

@item
Bug fixes: BinaryTree rotate methods fixed.  Fixed the way
@code{ifNone:} and @code{ifAbsent:} functions were called.  Fixed the
way long elements are printed.  Added methods for preventing memory
leaks by unfinished enumerations: @code{-newEnumState} and
@code{-freeEnumState:}.  Several bug fixes in List and Storage; changes
for better NeXT-compability.  And more.

@end itemize

@section Noteworthy changes in version @samp{931026}

@itemize @bullet

@item
Installation using @samp{./configure} and @samp{autoconf}

@item
New BinaryTree and RBTree(unfinished) classes.  Rewritten LinkedList
class.

@item
A new scheme for holding non-object elements in classes that require
  object contents; EltNodeCollector class.

@item
Archiving with -write: and -read: methods.  This involved removing the
ability to set the comparison function independent of content type.

@item
Removed COLL_NO_ELEMENT and friends.  Now there are no arbitrary
restrictions on which long int's can be stored.  Like in Smalltalk,
...ifAbsentCall: methods have been added to replace this functionalty.

@item
Added a LABMDA() macro for defining small functions in the arg position.

@item
Removed many ...perform: methods.  Use instead the more flexible 
...call: methods with LABMDA().

@item
Renamed ...Description: methods to ...Encoding: for better use of
already-defined objc keyword: @@encode().

@item
New in the Collecting protocol:
Filtered enumerating instead of filtered shallowCopy'ing.
Enumerations still safe when modifying the contents.

@item
The beginnings of documentation in libcoll.texi.

@item
Many bug fixes.

@item
...and more.

@end itemize

Also see the @samp{ChangeLog} file for more detail.

@ifinfo
Copyright @copyright{} 2005 Free Software Foundation

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
notice and this notice are preserved.
@end ifinfo

@end ifclear
@c end ifclear ANNOUNCE_ONLY

