=head1 NAME

docs-team-charter - Perl Documentation Team Charter

=head1 SUMMARY

This is the founding charter for the Perl Documentation Team.

The Perl project has a documentation sub-project, responsible for
maintaining the quality and consistency of Perl's core documentation.

This project is managed by the Documentation Team (a.k.a. "Docs Team").

=head2 Mission and Duties

=head3 Mission statement

The Perl Documentation Team oversees the quality, accessibility, and
maintainability of Perl's core documentation.

=head3 The mission in-depth

A few definitions of terms appearing in the mission statement:

=over

=item Perl's core documentation

By "core documentation", we mean all the documentation that ships with
Perl itself: stand-alone documents, function reference sections, and
documentation attached to standard modules.

Even though much of that standard module documentation doesn't exist
within Perl's core source distribution, the Docs Team still monitors
their state on CPAN, and actively makes recommendations to improve them
as needed.

=item Quality

The obvious job. The Docs Team is responsible for the core docs staying
up-to-date, consistently readable, and correct.

=item Accessibility

The Docs Team makes sure that Perl's core docs are discoverable and
navigable by all the language's users, new and old, across all relevant
media. This includes the web.

=item Maintainability

The Docs team treats the core docs as a proper FOSS concern, within the
larger Perl project.

This includes enthusiastically welcoming patches from the community, and
making it easy for any interested reader to discover how they can
contribute to the documentation project. It also includes working with
Core Team to make sure that docs stay synchronized with new Perl
releases.

=back

=head3 Duties

=over

=item *

Actively reviewing and improving Perl's existing collection of core
documentation. This includes revising this documentation as needed for
the sake of style, consistency, and modern best practices.

=item *

Assisting Perl contributors in making sure that any core documentation
they add or update adheres to established standards.

=item *

Encouraging the community to contribute to Perl's documentation, making
the process of submitting contributions clear and rewarding.

=item *

Fostering projects to improve the accessibility of Perl's core
documentation, across various media.

=back

=head2 Personnel

The Docs Team consists of one manager and any number of other volunteers.

The Docs Team manager is appointed by the Perl Steering Council, and may be
removed or replaced by them as well.

Both the manager and the Steering Council may add volunteers to or remove
volunteers from the Docs Team.

=head2 Resources

=head3 Mailing list

The Docs Team will maintain a publicly-archived mailing list for discussion of
its work.  The mailing list will be the medium of record for recording team
plans and decisions.  It must be possible for the Steering Council to transfer
the rights to the list when a change in Docs Team management occurs.

The current mailing list can be found at I<< to be determined >>.

=head3 Real-time chat

The team also collaborates on the C<< #docs >> channel on irc.perl.org.  The
manager may migrate this to other chat systems in the future at their own
discretion.

=head3 Funding

When appropriate, the team will seek funding for specific projects or materials
via grants from The Perl Foundation or similar sources, just as with any other
Perl infrastructure project. All Docs Team members otherwise serve on a
volunteer basis.
