=begin editor

Delete this begin/end block before publication.

Not every heading below is appropriate for every security issue, so
some may be deleted.

Look for FIXME to see what needs to be filled in.

=end editor

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

FIXME - short description of the security issue, with an identifier of the issue as the manpage name

=head1 DESCRIPTION

=for editor
Ideally, FIXME here should be the CVE-ID as a link to cve.mitre.org

This document describes the
L<FIXME|http://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=FIXME>
security vulnerability for perl 5.

=head2 Are there any known exploits "in the wild" for this vulnerability

FIXME or delete

=head2 Who is particularly vulnerable because of this issue?

FIXME or delete

=head2 What is the nature of the vulnerability?

FIXME

=head2 What potential exploits are enabled by this vulnerability?

FIXME or delete

=head2 Which major versions of perl 5 are affected?

FIXME with a list of versions that are affected, and which were updated.

=head2 How can users protect themselves?

FIXME or use the following:

If you are vulnerable, upgrade to the latest maintenance release for the
version of perl you are using.

If your release of perl is no longer supported by the perl 5 committers you
may need to upgrade to a new major release of perl. The versions currently
supported by the perl 5 committers are
FIXME 5.28.2 (until 2020-05-31)
and
FIXME 5.30.1 (until 2021-05-31).
The current version of perl is available from https://www.perl.org/get.html .

=head2 Who was given access to the information about the vulnerability?

FIXME or use the following:

Specifics about the vulnerability were first disclosed to
C<perl-security>, a closed subscriber mailing list that has a
subset of the perl committers subcribed to it.

=head2 When was the vulnerability discovered?

FIXME

=head2 Who discovered the vulnerability?

FIXME

=head2 How was the vulnerability reported?

FIXME: something like "So-and-so sent email to
perl-security@perl.org"

=cut
