@node Make
@appendix Using the GNUstep Make Package
@cindex GNUstep Make package
@cindex Make package, GNUstep

Reference/doc on the GNUstep make package; mainly examples of various
types of projects.

@section Makefile Contents
@paragraphindent 0

@b{Note. Type @code{man make} for assistance.}

Make files comprise four key content types:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@b{Comments}

@code{#} prefixes comments.

@item
@b{Macros}

@code{SRC=main.m} assigns a macro that is implemented as:@code{gcc $(SRC)}
and is interpreted as: 
@code{gcc main.m}

@item
@b{Explicit rules}
Explicit rules are used to indicate which files depend upon supporting files and 
the commands required for their compilation: 
@example
targetfile : sourcefiles
	commands           
@end example

A Tab precedes each command that must be implemented on the source files in order 
to create the target file: 
@example
main: main.m List.h
	gcc -o main main.m List.h
@end example
 
@item
@b{Implicit rules}
Implicit rules broadly echo explicit variants but do not specify commands, rather the 
extensions indicate which commands are performed:

@code{servertest.o: servertest.c io.h}
@*
is interpreted as: 
@*
@code{$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c servertest.c io.h}
@end itemize

@subsection Makefile Example

@example
# The following two lines force the standard make to recognize the 
# Objective-C .m suffix.

.SUFFIXES: .o .m
.m.o:
$(CC) -c $(CFLAGS) $< 


# Macro declarations

CC = gcc
CFLAGS = -g
LIBS = -lobjc
SRC=main.m Truck.m Station.m Vehicle.m
OBJ=main.o Truck.o Station.o Vehicle.o


# Explicit rules

hist: $(OBJ)
	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -o main $(OBJ) $(LIBS)


# Implicit rules

Truck.o: Truck.h Truck.m
Station.o: Truck.h Station.h Station.m
Vehicle.o: Truck.h Vehicle.h Vehicle.m
main.o: Station.h Vehicle.h

@end example


@subsection Makefile Structure

The following Makefile defines a project:

@example
#
# A GNUmakefile
#

# Check that the GNUSTEP_MAKEFILES environment variable is set
ifeq ($(GNUSTEP_MAKEFILES),)
GNUSTEP_MAKEFILES := $(shell gnustep-config --variable=GNUSTEP_MAKEFILES 2>/dev/null)
 ifeq ($(GNUSTEP_MAKEFILES),)
   $(error You need to set GNUSTEP_MAKEFILES before compiling!)
 endif
endif

# Include the common variables
include $(GNUSTEP_MAKEFILES)/common.make

# Build an Objective-C program
OBJC_PROGRAM_NAME = simple

# Objective-C files requiring compilation
simple_OBJC_FILES = source.m

-include GNUmakefile.preamble

# Include in the rules for making Objective-C programs
include $(GNUSTEP_MAKEFILES)/objc.make

-include GNUmakefile.postamble
@end example


To compile a package that uses the Makefile Package, type @code{make} in the 
top-level directory of the package. A non-GNUstep Objective-C file may be 
compiled by adding @code{-lobjc on} at the command line.


@subsection Debug and Profile Information


By default the Makefile Package does not flag the compiler to generate debugging 
information that is generated by typing:

@code{make debug=yes}

This command also causes the Makefile Package to turn off optimization. It is 
therefore necessary to override the optimization flag when running Make if both 
debugging information and optimization is required. Use the variable OPTFLAG to 
override the optimization flag. 

By default the Makefile Package does not instruct the compiler to create profiling 
information that is generated by typing:

@code{make profile=yes}
@sp 1

@subsection Static, Shared and DLLs

By default the Makefile Package generates a shared library if it is building a 
library project type, and it will link with shared libraries if it is building 
an application or command-line tool project type. To tell the Makefile Package 
not to build using shared libraries but using static libraries instead, type: 

@code{make shared=no}

This default is only applicable on systems that support shared libraries; 
systems that do not support shared libraries will always build using static 
libraries. Some systems support DLLs that are a form of shared libraries; on 
these systems DLLs are built by default unless the Makefile Package is told to 
build using static libraries instead. 

@section Project Types

Projects are divided into different types. To create a project of a specific 
type, a make file is specified:

@code{include $(GNUSTEP_MAKEFILES)/application.make}

Each project type is independent, and if you want to create two project types in 
the same directory (e.g. a tool and a Java program), include both the desired 
make files in your main Make file. 

@itemize @bullet
@item 
Aggregate - aggregate.make

An Aggregate project holds several sub-projects that are of any valid 
project type (including the Aggregate type). The only project variable is the 
SUBPROJECTS variable:

@code{Aggregate project: SUBPROJECTS} 

SUBPROJECTS defines the directory names that hold the sub-projects that the 
Aggregate project should build. 


@item Graphical Applications - application.make

An application is an Objective-C program that includes a GUI component, and by 
default links in all the GNUstep libraries required for GUI development, such as 
the Base and GUI libraries. 


@item Bundles - bundle.make

A bundle is a collection of resources and code that can be used to enhance an 
existing application or tool dynamically using the NSBundle class from the 
GNUstep base library. 


@item Command Line C Tools - ctool.make

A ctool is a project that uses only C language files. Otherwise it is similar to 
the ObjC project type. 


@item Documentation - documentation.make

The Documentation project provides rules to use various types of documentation 
such as texi and LaTeX documentation, and convert them into finished 
documentation like info, PostScript, HTML, etc. 

@item Frameworks - framework.make

A Framework is a collection of resources and a library that provides common code 
that can be linked into a Tool or Application. In many respects it is similar to 
a Bundle. 

@item Java - java.make

This project provides rules for building java programs. It also makes it easy to 
make java projects that interact with the GNUstep libraries. 

@item Libraries - library.make

The Makefile Package provides a project type for building libraries that may be 
static, shared, or dynamic link libraries (DLLs). The latter two variants are 
supported only on some platforms.
@end itemize
