.\" Copyright (c) 2008-2012 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.
.Dd March 1, 2012
.Dt dispatch_object 3
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME
.Nm dispatch_object
.Nd General manipulation of dispatch objects
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <dispatch/dispatch.h>
.Ft void
.Fo dispatch_retain
.Fa "dispatch_object_t object"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo dispatch_release
.Fa "dispatch_object_t object"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo dispatch_suspend
.Fa "dispatch_object_t object"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo dispatch_resume
.Fa "dispatch_object_t object"
.Fc
.Ft "void *"
.Fo dispatch_get_context
.Fa "dispatch_object_t object"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo dispatch_set_context
.Fa "dispatch_object_t object"
.Fa "void *context"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo dispatch_set_finalizer_f
.Fa "dispatch_object_t object"
.Fa "dispatch_function_t finalizer"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Dispatch objects share functions for coordinating memory management, suspension,
cancellation and context pointers.
.Sh MEMORY MANGEMENT
Objects returned by creation functions in the dispatch framework may be
uniformly retained and released with the functions
.Fn dispatch_retain
and
.Fn dispatch_release
respectively.
.Pp
The dispatch framework does not guarantee that any given client has the last or
only reference to a given object. Objects may be retained internally by the
system.
.Ss INTEGRATION WITH OBJECTIVE-C
.Bd -filled -offset indent
When building with an Objective-C or Objective-C++ compiler, dispatch objects
are declared as Objective-C types. This results in the following differences
compared to building as plain C/C++:
.Bl -dash
.It
if Objective-C Automated Reference Counting is enabled, dispatch objects are
memory managed by the Objective-C runtime and explicit calls to the
.Fn dispatch_retain
and
.Fn dispatch_release
functions will produce build errors.
.Pp
.Em Note :
when ARC is enabled, care needs to be taken with dispatch API returning an
interior pointer that is only valid as long as an associated object has not
been released. If that object is held in a variable with automatic storage, it
may need to be annotated with the
.Li objc_precise_lifetime
attribute, or stored in a
.Li __strong
instance variable instead, to ensure that the object is not prematurely
released. The functions returning interior pointers are
.Xr dispatch_data_create_map 3
and
.Xr dispatch_data_apply 3 .
.It
the Blocks runtime automatically retains and releases dispatch objects captured
by blocks upon
.Fn Block_copy
and
.Fn Block_release ,
e.g.\& as performed during asynchronous execution of a block via
.Xr dispatch_async 3 .
.Pp
.Em Note :
retain cycles may be encountered if dispatch source objects are captured by
their handler blocks; these cycles can be broken by declaring the captured
object
.Li __weak
or by calling
.Xr dispatch_source_cancel 3
to cause its handler blocks to be released explicitly.
.It
dispatch objects can be added directly to Cocoa collections, and their
lifetime is tracked by the Objective-C static analyzer.
.El
.Pp
Integration of dispatch objects with Objective-C requires targeting Mac\ OS\ X
10.8 or later, and is disabled when building with Objective-C Garbage
Collection or for the legacy Objective-C runtime. It can also be disabled
manually by using compiler options to define the
.Dv OS_OBJECT_USE_OBJC
preprocessor macro to
.Li 0 .
.Ed
.Pp
.Em Important :
When building with a plain C/C++ compiler or when integration with Objective-C
is disabled, dispatch objects are
.Em not
automatically retained and released when captured by a block. Therefore, when a
dispatch object is captured by a block that will be executed asynchronously,
the object must be manually retained and released:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dispatch_retain(object);
dispatch_async(queue, ^{
	do_something_with_object(object);
	dispatch_release(object);
});
.Ed
.Sh SUSPENSION
The invocation of blocks on dispatch queues or dispatch sources may be suspended
or resumed with the functions
.Fn dispatch_suspend
and
.Fn dispatch_resume
respectively. Other dispatch objects do not support suspension.
.Pp
The dispatch framework always checks the suspension status before executing a
block, but such changes never affect a block during execution (non-preemptive).
Therefore the suspension of an object is asynchronous, unless it is performed
from the context of the target queue for the given object.
The result of suspending or resuming an object that is not a dispatch queue or
a dispatch source is undefined.
.Pp
.Em Important :
suspension applies to all aspects of the dispatch object life cycle, including
the finalizer function and cancellation handler. Suspending an object causes it
to be retained and resuming an object causes it to be released. Therefore it is
important to balance calls to
.Fn dispatch_suspend
and
.Fn dispatch_resume
such that the dispatch object is fully resumed when the last reference is
released. The result of releasing all references to a dispatch object while in
a suspended state is undefined.
.Sh CONTEXT POINTERS
Dispatch objects support supplemental context pointers. The value of the
context pointer may be retrieved and updated with
.Fn dispatch_get_context
and
.Fn dispatch_set_context
respectively.
The
.Fn dispatch_set_finalizer_f
specifies an optional per-object finalizer function that is invoked
asynchronously if the context pointer is not NULL when the last
reference to the object is released.
This gives the
application an opportunity to free the context data associated with the object.
The finalizer will be run on the object's target queue.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dispatch 3 ,
.Xr dispatch_async 3 ,
.Xr dispatch_group_create 3 ,
.Xr dispatch_queue_create 3 ,
.Xr dispatch_semaphore_create 3 ,
.Xr dispatch_set_target_queue 3 ,
.Xr dispatch_source_cancel 3 ,
.Xr dispatch_source_create 3
